Mollohon Mill
Newberry, S. C.
Dec 20, 1938
GLSummer
THE CLARYS
An old dilapidated store building, which has never been painted, stands near the railroad crossing and on the side road that runs from the mill village. It is not a part of the mill property, and is owned by a man named Kinard. The Clary family occupies the building as a home, have been there about five years. They are a family that have had, in the years past, to ask charity from the public, and many times their little ones would go from house to house and ask for something to wear or even something to eat. Even though the front steps are about to fall away, and on the front porch are some large holes, where the planks have been busted through, they seem to be satisfied in their hut.
If you go inside the front door, the room apears dark, except that the knot holes in the splintered and unpainted floor give some semblance of light which comes from under the house. Then, too, a large hole in the back door, where a panel has been broken out, in the absence of windows, gives some light for the rear end of the room. Thus, too, a continous flow of air is available. The room is used as a living room, company room, bed room, dining room and kitchen.
The-caller is asked to sit down on an old dusty chair, the legs of which have been repaired by nailing rough boards across them, which keeps the chair from falling down. Lillian Mauldin, a young girlish looking woman, says that she is a daughter of the Clarys, her mother, Bessie Clary being out visiting a neighbor, and her father away at work, working on a construction jot for the Works Progress Administration. She says that her father is deaf and dumb, that he has been that way all of his life; though he works every day ditching, and sometime he hauls mortal for the masons. His wages are $15.60 each two weeks, or half month. He is 55 or 56 years old and her mother is 53 years old. She says that she has had a hard time; is 27 years old, and has two children, which lives there with them. That her husband who is somewhere in North Carloina-- she does not <text not clear> where-- never helps her any; he left her and the two babies, but they never have got a divorce. When they were in North Carolina, she says, she was so sick in Hendersonville, she was about to die. He mother came up there to be with her, and finally she pulled through. Then she came back home with her two little ones, and are now living with her parents. She says that her mother has seven children, the oldest girl being married a and living in Marion, S. C., where her husband works as a laborer and sometimes preaches at the holiness church. "no sir, I ain got a divorce," and seems to be reconciled to the situation, even though she gets no help from her husband and does not knwo where he is at this time.
She says that her mother was born and reared in Saluda County, South Carolina, a daughter of a Holt family; that they were all farmers, and she is a brother of Jack and Butler Holt who lived at Whitmire, S. C. Her father's people lived in Newberry County, on farms, that some of them were good farmers; that he has a better education than her mother, having two diplomas, one from the Cedar Springs Institute, near Spartanburg, S. C. But, she says, he always had a hard time "gittin along," because he is deaf and dumb, and people don't undetsand him. He moved to the Newberry Cotton Mills and worked about 15 years, in the spinning room, or card room, Later on, she says, he moved back to the farm, after he had tried to work at Ware Shoals mill one year; stayed a year on his brother's farm, in a little house on the place. Getting dissatisfied, he moved to the Oakland Mill and worked two years; then quit, worked first one job and then aother, at times, she says. Since the W.P.A. has been going on he has been with them, has been working regular when they would give him regular work. The wages are mighty little, she says, but it helps". She says that her two brothers, young boys, have been able to get on the N. Y. A., and they each draw $5.95 wages each half month or two weeks. She says that she and her mother do all the work around the place, cooking, washing, ironing, splitting wood, and a little work in garden. "We get water from one of the enighbors," she says, and several houses around there get water from the same place; because they are not connected with the town water supply, don't have a well on their place. She says that they don't have any electric lights, either, and use only a small oil lamp.
The home-made toy wagons, and other dusty and soiled toys that are scattered around in every corner of the room and under the bed, with an old black checkered quilt, dusty and soiled, thrown over an unkemp bed, one wonders how they keep healthy. A red oil cloth covers the eating table which sets between the stove and the bed, another table with an oil cloth is near the front door, while an old slanted desk (she says it belongs to the owner of the building who allowed it stay there when they came in), is over aginst the wall about half way of the room. The bareness of the walls is off-set by a large galvanized and rusted or broken wash pan and a pair overalls hanging on nails on the walls of one side, and on the other side hangs a few old clothes, and above the wall, adjoining the side rooms can be seen the ends of a rake and hoe as they rest on the rafters of the adjoining ceiling of the next room.
As she talks, a five year old baby comes into the room, sniffling with a cold. The daughter says to an older child, "dont you see she got a cold, leave her alone, and dont let her go out doors". The older child then fgoes back and gets a drink of water, with a dipper, from a wooden water-bucket which sets on a small shelf against the wall near the rear door. Presently, a young boy comes in, having on a pair of overalls, and gets a drnk of water, then he goes out.
She says that the hole in the back door, Mr Kinard promised to fix. He sent a little lumber to have it fixed--papa promised to fix it-- but someway it' ain't ever got fixed--bobody ain't got time to do it". Then, she says, they pay $2.00 a month rent for the place.
She says that the children don't go to school in town, as they dont like it up there; but a teacher comes by for them every morning and takes them to her school, which is about two miles or three miles out in the country. She brings them back home after school is out, in her automobile. (Inquiry discloses that the rural community could not get enough pupils to allow it to open for the session, and they went over into the mill section and get enoug additional pupils so the school could start- GLS)... She says that her mother always said that she wanted the children to go to school as she didnt get much chance to go. They have three children in school, at Johnstone School, two brothers and a sister.
They go to Sunday school, too, to the Holy Roly Church which is donw the road a piece from there, called the Pentecost Holiness Church, which is their mothers church and it is near to them. She says her papa goes sometimes to the Smyrna Presbyterian Church, which is about eight miles above town. That is his home section. Then, one of the little girls, who lingering nearby, exclaims, "I go to Sunday School"...
She says that none of them go in for any kind of amusements. They have a park over in the mill village, but none of them go there. The boys dont care about base-ball, but they sometimes go to a picture show.
Sickness has not been bad in the family, she says, except the baby had measles last Spring. About this time a grey and white spotted cat comes into the room, which looks as if it had not had a bath anytime. In the front door stands a large black dog which had come in to see what was interesting; but with a sedate look it bowed it's head and sat down near the door on the front porch. Again the daughter hollers at her younger sister to keep quiet, as the younger one had complained that M.... had put water on her head. Then Lillian, the oldest, says, "go get me switch, a good, hickory switch."
They find it hard, sometimes, to get along with what her father and the two boys make, but get by. They buy their groceries uptown at one of the chain stores, but they have no auto and lug it home; but sometimes the store will deliver them.
Newberry Cotton Mill
Newberry, S.C
Dec 28, 1938
G.L. Summer
THE EDWARD FULMERS
A fifty-eight year old man sits in the back bed-room of his four-room cottage, with his wife sitting beside him, and with evidence of cleanliness in his surroundings. He tells why he has lived 44 years in the this mill village, the only mill he has ever worked in during this period of years. He says that he started in the mill as a roving boy, and worked up to his present job as a fixer in the card room at a wage of $22.00 a week. But, he says, the fixers never make that much each week, as most always they stop production until the other departments catch up, since this $22.00 is only a basis rate on which they work. During all these years, he says, "I have always done what they asked me."
"No, I don't own this house", he says, "it is one of the mill houses." The house looks as if it has been recently repainted, white; has a large yard, with a wide chicken yard on the right, in front, in which are seen many chickens, of a variety of kinds, though, he says, some of them are pure wyandotes. The house, located away from the regular rows of mill houses, overlooks a large part of the new part of the mill village. A COW stands in a stall some distance from the houses, which, he says, belongs to him, and she furnishes much of the food for the family, plenty of good milk and butter.
One goes into the house through a square looking hall, on the floor of ehich is a narrow linoleum rug, and against the wall a was stand with white bowl and pitcher, through the front bed room which presents a btter appearnace, by constrast. In this front bed room, the absence of a bowl and pitcher may account for the one in the hall; but it presents a nice new rug, a new four-poster bed, finished in oak, and few pictures on the painted wooden walls. Entering the back bed-room through a door on the side of the fire-place, an old, slightly worn linoleum rug is seen on the floor, extending from the hearth, in front of a grate which is filled with red-hot coals, to and under the two beds, old-looking, that stand in the rear corners of the room. A broom satnds in the corner near the front room door, with its straw end up, thus carrying out an old supers tous sign that in this position luck will come to the house, but the wife says that she always stands it up to keep it from getting bent. The door between the two rooms is propped opne with a cloth-covered brick, a dusty, purplish color.
He says that he came to the dewberry Cotton Mills with his father and mother when he was 14 years old, they having come here from a farm in the piney woods section of the Dutch Fork, because they were not making anything much on the farm and they thought they might do better in the mill. His father and mother died in the mill village a few years ago. His wife's people, he says, lived in the village, too. Then the wife says that her father and mother came from Saluda County, S. C., off of a farm. She says that she was a Bedenbaugh before she married.
"In all the time I been workin' in this here mill", which, he says, "is a longer time than most of the people here now, and the longest of any now working in the card room," he has never been dissatisfied. He thinks a man, if he gets tired of his job, ought to quit and go out and get a job somewhere else. "I worked," he says, "since I been here, for 44 years in the this same mill, under two mill presidents, four superintendents, and eleven overseers, and liked them all." He says he worked under old man Wilbur when he was the super, who had come down here from some place in New England, and liked him, but some of the people didnt get along with him". A northern man, he says, most of them, don't seem to understand how to work southern labor. Marion Davis, he says, was the best man they had here as super; he got along fine with everybody, and everybody liked him; and the mill made money when he was super. He says that Davis started in as a doffer boy in the mill, worked his way gardaully up through several jobs, to second boss, overseer, and then superintendent. He was liked by many twon people, also, and was elected a member of the board of trustees of the city, made it's chairman, and the, later was elected mayor of the city, in which he served for several terms. He didnt have much education, he says, but he studied at home at night, and took correspondence courses. He could make a good speech, and was called an educated man by a former editor of a Newberry paper.
He says that of their children, of which there are five, two of them are married and left. Now, they have one daughter who graduated at the Newberry High school and have a daughter now in the Junior High in Newberry. Two sons work in the mill, unmarried sons, and they help little in paying some board. They both believe, he says, in good education for children. Since they have lived 19 years in this same house, they have raised most of the children here-- and the place is like a home to them, he says. They pay $1.40 rent to the mill each two weeks for the house, which they think is reasonable enough, thought they pay their water and light bills.
He says that his boys don't run about much, as they don't have an automobile; but one of the boys likes base-ball and the other likes to go sometimes to the picture shows and don't much about base-ball. He says that they have a team which plays in the textile league. Down in the mill park, he says, they have skating rink, a place to play basket-ball, but his boys dont go in for these things. He says that his boys don't go out with girls much, and if you ask one of them if he has a girl, he will cut you off quick and say, "No."
Talking about cotton mill work as compared to the farm he says he doess mot know about farming much because he was young when they came here, but that they like it well enough here. Continuing, he says, "I tell, between you and me and the grave-yard, the farmer can sit by his fire all day when it freezes, rains or snows, but we got to fo to the mill everyday, just the same."
Old man Z.W., the President of the mill, has been Prest over twnety years, but he is getting down now. He has a bad health, and gettin up in age. He made speech not long ago, in park, and now begins to think back over the years, and says if he could live over some things he would live it some other way. Once, he says, he asked Z.W. for a small advance as he had been out of the mill, but he cut me oof and said he couldnt let me have it; but later he sent for me out of the mill and pulled the money out of his pocket and said he had got it for me. He says that he had asked Marion Davis, and talked with him about him.
"Old Mr Bob W. shore wus a good fellow," he says, "he wus book-keeper the paymaster ever since the mill wus first built". He says he thinks the mill was put up, the first building, in the year 1884. He says that everybody in the mill thought Mr Bob was a good man, one of the finest of fellows. He was kind to people when they came into the office to do business with him. He says that Mr Bob W., a long time before he died, always said he sometimes lay wake at night worrying how some of the people in the mill, who had so much deducted from their pay tickets, would live the next week, or until the next payday.
The mill, he says, has got two things that are good for the familes here, the Burial Fund end the doctors lists, which are kept fin the mill office. He says that in the Burial Fund, it is kinder like insurance, ten cents is deducted from the pay ticket of each family for each member of the family that is above 10 years old, and the amount is credited to this fund in the mill office; but if a child under ten years old dies, then they fund pays as much as $25.00 towards its burial expenses, as a reserve is carried in the fund all the time. Some of the older docters had lists of families who were their patients when sick. These families had deducted from their pay ticket each pay day about ten cents a head, and the amount given to the doctor. This plan pays all doctors bills in any kinds of sickness, except hospital bills. When the old cotors died, he says, they had no lists there. Then some of the poeple began to worry or complain about it, because they didnt like to pay $2.00 to a doctor for each vist he made. So the folks, he says, got together, formed a committee, and fater talking with the President of the mill and the superintendent they went out and talked with some of the doctors; but none seemed to be interested in the plan, not until they talked with Dr Me C. who had lately come back to Newberry to take up his practice again. So, he says, we gpt Dr Mc C. and we got a good list here now.
When the stretchout system started here, he says, some of the workers looks like they would have to slave to death. Then, he says, lost of people were out of jobs, and "didnt know what to do". "Prest Roosevelt," he says, "got 'em out of it." Roosevelt has made a good President, he continues along this line, and has helped lots of people; "he made some mistakes, but everybody makes them." He thinks Roosevelt might be elected again if he runs for President, but he believes that he will not run again.
He says that they belong to the Mayer Memorial Lutheran Church; that they all go to church most every Sunday, and the children go to Sunday School, that is the sammler ones, and they all give some regular contributions to the church. The pastor, he says, is a good talker, a good preacher. "Heard him say not long 'go," he says, "he got a call from another church in Newberry", and he wonders if there is anything in it.
Talking about Dr MC, he says, who got up the doctors lists here, he has just left my house. He tells about his indigestion end chronic appendicitis; that the doctor came pass to look him over. He says that he had drunk some blackberry wine and it locked up his gall baldder. "Dr. McC says that is my whole trouble". He tells about having four X-ray pictures made which showed up a swollen appendix; but the doctor who made the pictures said that it would hurt as long as it was there, but he didnt think it would ever bust. There is an old man who lives up in the little town of Ninety Six, he says, that cures appendicitis without an operation. He says that he dosnt know if he can or not, but he has never got up enough faith in it to go up there to see him.
Now, he continues, he has worked pretty hard and his work has been pretty close, but never had any troubles with his, health before, and the rest of his family are pretty healthy. They all try to eat things that agree with them, they have their fresh vegetables, and some meats, though they never plant a garden. He says they all are too tired to work a garden after they come home from work.
The wife who seems interested in the talk, says, we have no automobile, and it is long ways to walk. They live says the husband close to the town limits, but just inside. The wife says they have a radio, and the children have it going nearly all the time they are in the house. "I told Mr S," she says, "if we didnt have a radio now, and I saw him coming with one through the front door, I'd say to him to take it back to his store." The four-poster bed you see in the front room, she says, is not so old. She says, though, that she remembers when her grandfather had two four-poster beds, made of oak, she thought, but she does not know what ever became of the beds. Mr Z. W., the President of themill, used to have in the mill office an old - time wooden spinning wheel that they used to use in old times, but she does not if it is still there or not. He had put up, she says, an old gin screw down by the park, so people could see how the old tim epople use to bale their cotton. You may have seen it, she says, when you passed the park. Mr. S. who runs the furniture store up town told us, she says, that he paid $210.00 for a piece of furniture that belonged to old Mr Dreher, an old bachelor, who died down on his farm near the Murray Dam, on Saluda River. The Drehers once owned most of the lands around the dam section, many rich folks.
He says that they get up about day-light in the mornings, the wife cooks breakfast, and they go to work at the crack of day. The wife says that she does all of the work around the house, cooking, cashing and ironing, and cleaning up; that they do not, hire any servants for anything. They have dinner at 12 O'clock, when the men come home from the mill, and they have an hour for dinner. Some take their lunch with them to work.
This place, he says, is like a home to me, after so many years living here, and doubts if he would satisfied anywhere else.
With the thermometer around 40, one wonders if the wide coal grate, in which the wife has just filled with more coal, is not being overworked, since the front door and both room doors are wide open during their talk. But the sun setting behind the large pines in the distance, makes you realize that some change in the temperature is about due.
You arise to leave, and starting towards the door, the husband gets up and follows you to the front door and as far as the steps. Then, you walk across the front yard, in a foot-path, with dead wire-grass over the yard, until you get to the unpaved narrow street that leads to a wider paved street about three blocks away.
Winnsboro Cotton M
No 710 Main road
Winnsboro, S. C.
Jan 9, 1939
G. L. Summer
MRS. HATTLE HUDSON (white)
A sligtly uphill street, on the first approach to the mill village, discloses many tenant houses in this modern village, that are attractively painted. There are no fences to mar the beauty of the smooth, green lawns that surround each home, which are closely surrounded with, evergreen bushes and other shrubbery. Inquiry discloses that the grounds and shrubbery are kept up by the mill company. Most of the side walks and streets are paved with concrete, and their forms show expert planning of the village.
Outside of the pretty lawns and shrubbery, there is nothing to attract your attention on this main street, except one house which shows the front porch to be a kind of place for hanging bed clothes to dry, for twines extend from one post or column to another, on which are several bed spreads and quilts hanging out in the sunshine. Another house shows the back yard to be filled with clothes lines that are filled to capacity with underclothes, overalls and dresses, hanging out to dry. However, your particular attention may be called to the Community House which sets back on a small elevation on the right of the street, all of its yard showing a freshly mowed, green lawn; and surrounding There are many evergreen bsuhes, shruberry and small trees. It is a one-story building, one end being constructed of tea brick and the other of frame, painted white, around which is a long porch which lies on the ground and supporting the roof by several square white columns. In the center of the building in front is a tower which runs up to a point at the roof, not much higher than the house roof, giving a done-like appearance; the roof being spotted with small gables that stand out from it, in each being a small window. The Baptist Church, just beyond the community building gives also an English setting, in style and architecture. It is built of rough concrete, very wide, with a few gables and steeples of moderate proportions. It too, is surrounded with beautiful lawns and shrubbery.
Other churches in the same counnity show attractive designs, though smaller. They are constructed of rough concrete. The Church of God, which is a Holiness church, is located farther away, as also the Nazarene Church, a kind of Holiness church, too, though retaining much of the Baptist forms.
A one story four-room house near the front street shows the front door open, apparently to air out the building, even though it is a comparatively cold Winter day. Going up to the door and knocking twice upon it, a middle -aged woman of middle size comes out and greets you. She has on a house apron, and some old dress that looks like it has been worn for sometime around the house. She asks you to sit down, amidst a combination or variety of furniture. A bed is in the corner, well made up and covered with a clean pink bed cover. One come a trunk is seen, a black, though soiled, stemer 1/2 trunk.; then you see what looks like a new radio near the side window; in another corner behind the door being an old out of order and out of date phonograph, looking much like small chefferole. Two large, plush chairs, the color of the seats and backs being a blend with the pink bed cover, The unpainted floor is nearly covered with a large, new rug, which, too blends with the chairs. The walls which are of rough plaster, brown in color, seems rather bare, except for one or two small pictures.
Mrs. Hudson says she lives with her husband and two children he is a 72-year old super-annuated Methodist preacher, having just quit preaching about a year ago. She says that she is only 57 years old, and his second wife. Her husband had 14 children four by his first wife and ten by her. All are married except one who is dead and the two of hers who live with them. She says that her 21-year old daughter works in the mill and draws about $12.00 a week as a spinner, and that her son, who is just a little younger, works in the card room as a spare hand and gets about $14.00 a week when his departemnt is running full time. My husband, she says, is too old to work; he has tried to get a pension from the government, and also has an application in to the Methodist for a <text not clear> for super-annuanced preachers, but has not yet heard from any of them.
They do very well now she says if the children worked full time all the time, but it cost lots to get along after paying $2.00 a week rent, doctor bills and other bills each week. But they havnt had any sickness lately. Some of the families around here, she says, have cows that they pasture over in the pasture that the mill company has provided, and some keep hogs; but they havnt any of them, as they don't have time to look after them. She says the mill company won't allow chickens kept on the house lots; but will alow them to have small gardens, though they don't have one.
She says that she was born and raised in Florence county, South Carolina, a Broach before she married. Her husband, she says, was born and raised in Sumter county, S. C. Their parents were farmers; that they were both raised on farms; went to the country schools when they run about two or three months in the Winters, and listing all day long. She says that her husband has preached for 40 years, in different places, with regular charges, and that this is his first year he has been without a church. She hopes that since he is now placed on the super-annuated list, that he can get an old age pension. She says that her husbands parents were Baptists, but he went over to the Methodist church, the church of her people.
"The chaps got it good now", she says, "going to school in the buses, free, and dont have to pay no tuition charge." It seems that her daughter went to the high school in Camden, S. C when they lived in the mill village of that place; but after coming over to Winnsbo, she started working in the mill, which was five years ago.
She says that her job is to keep house, cook, and wash and iron; but she says that she has lately had to hire a servant to do the washing and ironing. She has just finished putting her butter milk in her churn to churn butter, she says, but she can do it anytime. Her husband is too old to work now, she says but goes around and does what good he can in the village.
She says that her son likes base-ball, and goes to lots of the games, but none of the rest of us like it, she says. We got an auto but don't go out in it much, only up town or on Sundays. She says they don't go for much amusements, only the young ones a little.
"We don't take any part in local politics, "she says, "my husband just votes, and that is all".
She says that there are some good grocery stores in the village, one a large chain store that gives good prices, and they buy most of their supplies from them. They also have a good drug store. They are mighty convenient, she says, because it is so far from town, nearly 1 1/4 miles.
If you walk down one of the streets towards the mill plant, over some of the boulevard-like paved streets, you come to a building that looks like some old church, with cement exterior of rough design, and it's peculiarily arrenged doors and roof. Somebody will tell you, though, that this is the old community house which is now being used as the boarding hall and is run by some local family. Across a small stream that runs through one side of the pasture, you see many cows near the edge of the thick woods, grazing on the scattered grass. Following the street further down you see the two small streams come together near the concrete bridge in the street, and on the other side they form a wider street which is walled up on each side with rough, gray stone blocks, in maonsry fashion, making the surrounding area sanitary; and the full stream flows around the circular bends of the walls with an even force.
Beyond one end of the mill plant, a small brick building projects out from the main building of the mill, in front of which is a cement walk that leads from the stream to the door. This is the office. The walk is lined on each side with a variety of evergreen bushes, china berry trees, small cedars, and other shrubbery; and running pararell to the walk is an automobile drive.
A triangular shaped front yard is shown to the left of the branch, elevated so that cement steps to lead to the narrow walk from each side street. The paved walk leads to the front door which is shaded only with a narrow alcove. This one-story concrete building is used as the local clinic or hospital. Since there is no local surgeon there, it is called an emergency hospital or clinic. In it the community nurse lives with her helper. Around one side of the building, a side entrance presents a door which is evidently the entrance for patients, with its cement, square columns, and alcove, over the roof of which trails a bunch of ivey vines. They will tell you around there that the building is equipped with all necessary supplies for surgery.
Mollohon Mill
1314 Milligan
Newberry, SC
Dec 19, 1938
G. L. Summer
THE HUFFSTETLERS.
Across a paved street which runs from the mill boarding house in the old village, in an oddish looking house that is not on property of the mill, sits a middle-aged man in a hanging porch swing. He can be seen sitting there most any warm day, where the rays of the sun in the afternoon strikes him. If you ask him what is his occupation, he says, "just piddling"; and any further explanation you want as to what "piddiling" means, he will tell you it emans working around the house. His wife, who has an expression quiet humor, if she happens to be standing near, will say that "piddling" means washing and ironing, and maybe cutting wood. As to this, he laughs, and explains that for the last few years he has not been able to get a job, since he had to give up heavy work on account of his rupture. "I believe hernia is the new name for it," he says, and then tells about the time when he first felt it about 35 years ago, and has had to wear a truss ever since that time.
The five-rrom house, with it's small, front porch, is shaded by two large china berry trees, one on each side of the walk; while on the right side of the front yard is an enclosed chicken yard, with a wire fence, in which are about 15 large Rhode Island Beds and Dominicks.
Glancing through the front door, discloses a living and bed room, both in one, an old-time dresser in an opposite corner, a few small pictures on the unpainted wooden walls, and a large, new rug, of a design that seems a bit out of blend with the interior. The ceiling is new and has never been painted. He says that the house was built a short time before the mill company built the new part of the village, and that two young women who live down belowe Propserity, in this county, own the house. He supposes that the rent they have to pay each months, $15.00, is alright, as you have to pay more up town for same size house. But "it ain't got no bath room", he says, and they have to take their baths in their bedrooms, in the old time was tubs, with water they get from the well in the backyard, as they are not connected with the city water works system. They do have, though, electric lights, that have always been in the house.
One of his daughters and his wife are out on the porch, listening to the talk, and then two other daughters come out, leaning against the bannisters. These are his daughters, as he explains, and says that he has eight children. One of these daughters who is 24 years old, works in the mill, in the spinning room. Upon being asked if she liked her work and her superiors, she says, she likes her job alright and likes her from oversser very weel-- "recon he will do"-- and as for her super he will do, too. Then, he says, hehas a son who works in the weave room as a weaver at $18.00 a week, and he is 50 years old. It appears that two daughters are married, and live away, three chuldren are in the public school of Newberry, one of them in grammar schhol and two in High School. He thinks it is good for children to go to work after they finish school; and his wife, who leans aginst the banisters, smiles her assent, allowing him to do the talking.
Now, he says, you never hear of my name around here. He says his father came from North Carolina, when a young man, and settled down in Lexington county, South Carolina, He was a saw mill man and a farmer. He run a farm down there, and married down there, where I was born and raised, he says. "I worked many a day at a saw-mill, too, and at log-rolling. "That is how I got ruptered", he says, "the new name fur it is hernia, you know." Then he talks about his wife's folks--she was Mary Amick before she married, a daughter of Adam and Jane Amick, and they all lived on a farm. Her gr-parents, too, lived in that section, where the old folks made plenty to eat on the farm, and lived "at home". He says that he quit farming in 1920, and did some carpenter work; that he had to quit carpentering on account of his hernia. "Talking about the Amicks," he says, did you know old Jeff Amick who moved up to Newberry many years ago. Then he asks the question about his daughters, that one lives in Neb Newberry and got a good job with the WPA. He tells shout how Jeff as a young man had to elope with his wife who was a Rawles before she married. He says that Jeff had been trying to go see the girl, and finally stole her awy from home; and when they ran off, the old man heard about it and got after him with a shotgun. Sais he would kill him cause he was not good enough for his daughter. But he didnt catch him and they got married. Of course, the old man coulnt do anything fater it was too late.
When he came to the mill about 15 years ago-- "it will be 15 years the first of this week"-- he says that he worked in this mill as a presser; but the work got so hard for him, and the lifting was so heavy, he had to quit. Onetime, he says, he was out a week on account of his rupture, and got behind and after talking about why he came to the mill, everything "went kerflunk" in business, and then says that he hardly knew what he would do if he couldnt hold down his job. After being out of the mill for a time, he went to the super and told him about his hernia, and the super was surprised, said that he didnt know that he had that trouble. Then, the super told him he, too, had the same trouble, and they talked a long time in his office; and the result was, the super obtained a cash loan from the foofice for him, and told him he could pay it back anytime in the future when he went to work, in small installments. Then, he went to the Presidnet, who the super had talked with, and they promised to get him lighter work, which they did. They gave him work in the mill at night, with no heavy lifting. They would go to work, he says, and work until after midnight. "they wus fine men, that used to run the mill in them days," he says, "all the mill people shore wus liking them." He says that he heard this super is now superintendent of a mill in Georgia, but if he was to come to any mill in South Carolina, I would move to his mill, he says. Mr Geo, the Prest is gittin old, and retired; but when he sold out to the Kendalls, he whore was missed. The Kendall company had it first some northern men here running things, and most of them didnt get along with the labor. They dont seem to get along with southern labor. But now they got southern fellows, and they seem to be doing very well.
He says that his children are satisfied with their jobs, and they are doing alright; but they had some cust in their wages.
He says that they want their children to finish schhol, as they believe in good education; they want them to go through high school. "We never had a chance", he says, "all we had was a one-room country school." The school he went to was close to his fathers home, and he didnt have far to walk; but his wife says that she was the ome who had to walk far, abiut three miles every day. She went to Macedonia Schjol, down below the Piney Woods section. All the country schools then were one-teacher schools, and "a teacher could do then what it takes three to do now," he says. They both think an education is an advantage at these times, and insist their children go on through school.
The churches they were reared up in were the Lutheran churches, as most of the churches in that part of the Dutch Fork were Lutheran. They belong to the Mayer memorial Lutheran Church, at West End, Newberry Cotton Mills, Newberry, and their children attend the Sunday School of that church, giving their regular contributions to the church and Sunday school. They like their pastor, Rev Fulmer, who was born and reared near the section from which they came.
They are juts a family of contented folks and seldom go in for any kind of amusements. The son who works in the mill, likes base-ball a lots, and the girls sometimes, though not often, go to a picture show; but other than that they dont have any time for amusements and running around. They dont have a car nor a radio, None of the girls have ever studied music, and not muc inclined towards music.
When they first came to the mill, he says, they lived in a mill house. That was when he worked at first so hard, with heavy lifting-- he had to put 100 yards to the cut--and lost so much weight, when the Prest got the super to give him lighter work in the mill, at night. He went to work at 5:00 P.M. and worked until 12:00 at night, then had one half hour for lunch, and worked until 5:30 P.M. Being in a reminiscent mood, he again refers to the time when Mr G. was Prest and Mr E. was the super, and were so good to the mill people. They built a new park, a new school house, of large brick design, and helped in other ways. to improve the conditions around the village for the people. He says they have a band, too, and it does pretty good, considering they have just a local boy as the dorector...
Glancing towards the front yard, a trash can is seen filled and the yard apparently having just been swept with a long brush broom. He says that the city trash cart comes around twice each week and takes up the trash, but they hadnt been back that day. They have four carts in town, he says, and it takes all their time to get around everywhere.... Across the street are seen neatly trimmed, greeen hedges around the yards of the village homes. He says that they are even prettier over in the old part of the village. That each family is retired to keep his hedges trimmed; thought the mill company planted them and fixed up the yards.
We have some good neighbors, he says, "around here", and "everybody attends to his-own business"... He says that at one time he lived by a feloow over in the old part of the village, who was a raw fellow. He didnt have anything to do with anybody else, in any way at all. He tells about the time this fellow got made when their two little boys got in a fight, and "slapped my boy," he says. They boys were the same size, and ought not to pay any attention to kids scarps, and he showed what kind of a fellow he was. "I got so mad, "he says," when I heard about it", I wanted to kill him, and would have killed him if it hadnt been for my wife. I went to see him and sked him why he did it, but he wouldnt say anything much about it. Then, the incident was reported to the super who had the fellow come to his office. The supet told the fellow, he says, that if it had been his boy he would have broke his neck. An dthe overseer under whom he worked said if it had been his boy he believed he would have got made enough to kill him. After they talked to this fellow that way, the super told him he could make arrangements to move away as they dint want him around the mill.
"Well, "he says," you come acroos all kinds of people in the mill business and in the saw-mill business." He has worked in the saw-mill business 15 years, and found out that "you got to know the nature of a man to get along with him." So many folks working at the same place, he says, some of them are bound to be rough-necks. He tells about a man who moved from Virginia to the Dutch Fork section, and started saw-mill and planing mill business. This man was named Robertson, and he would get up in the morning at day-light, along with his hands, and works just as hard as they did, until sun-down. He says the man had more energiy then some of his hands. "He cut over a million feet of lumber". Some of it went into the building of the new part of the Mollohon Mill. He says that he worked for old man Robertson and found him alright, except he was a man who wanted to have his won way in everything. Later, he says, the old man moved to Columbia, S. C., and started up a lumber business down there, and died in that city. He says that he will always remember the old man's horse, that he brought with him from Virginia. He called him "Douglass", and said he had some racing blood in him. He let me ride him lots of times.
"I didnt tell you", he says, "about ray two hogs, which we killed this Winter. I raised them in a lot away back of here, in back of Buzhardts place, some distances from the houses. Several men had hogs there in the loss, different pens, and and rasied some. My hogs weighed 480 pounfs each, and cost me $40.50 for both." They dressed the meat, and fixed up the old bam in rear of the home, in which they have stored it.
Asking about his garden, he says they raise some vegetables, a as the family like fresh vegetables; but they like heavy meets, too, he says. They raise beans, collards, and tomatoes.
He says that they take little interest in politics, but they vote, which is about ell they co. They dont belong to any union,. All are Democrats.
They have had no sickness in the family, he says, not for a long time, except two small children that had the measles about a year ago. But about two years ago, he says, three of their children had appendicitis, and had to be operated on at the county hospital, They got Dr Bonnet from Columbia to come up and do the operations. He says the family, all of them, have very good health., "except my hernia."
The daughters having gone into the house, and the wife, about this time starting towards the door, and one daughting standing in the door, they see their white cat start acroos the paved street, and sit behind a parked automobile. Fearing he might get hurt, one of them suggests that the cat should be gotten and brought back to the house; Suddenly, the cat jumps up and runs into the front yard of the neighbor across the street; and the women appear to be satisfiled, and continue into the house A well-dressed man of about 35 years of age comes up into the front porch, speaks, politely; then he is introduched as one who rents a room in the house, and works in the mill as a weaver.. Then he goes into the house.
Edgefield Cotton Mil
(Kendall plant)
Edgefield, S. C.
Dec 15, 1938
G. L. Summer
ELIZABETH P. JACKSON.
Several cotton mill houses are on each side of a narrow, little street, each of similar style and size, but little attention having been paid to lines. In the rear of them, back in a small field, sets an unpainted one-story, four-room cabin. It's front yards consists of a vegetable garden, which is now half grown in tell collard plants, and enclosed with wire fence that runs parrellel with the railroad siding which is between the street and the garden. A corner gate admits you, which winds slightly around the garden to the front porch, a narrow kind porch having a chair and a swing which hangs from the celing with chains, and on it's seat a home-made rug, knitted from olf scraps of cloth. On the right of the house, is a large chicken yard, enclosed with chicken wire fence, and three hen houses, surrounded by about 50 or 60 hens of various types.
A knock at the door, and a wrinkled old woman, stooped, and with white hair, with stands hanging down the sides of her face, cames hobbling to the door and opens it. She does not speak, but looks for about a minute with steeel blue eyes piercing you; then, with a light gleam and a smile, she asks you to come in. Going through a small alcove, through another door, we enetr a large combination livng and bed-room. After stating the purposes of your visit she invites you to sit down, and with a wave of her hand, doubts of she can give much information. She sits in an upholstered rocker, which is directly in front of the small iron heater. She is dressed in a gray-blue suit of clothes that looks much like wide pajamas and in bed-room slippers. Her apparent weariness shows that she is evry hit her 80 years, and her relaxed manner shows that she constantly rests in this large chair. Though the bed seems to be tidily made up, she offers no excuse for the worn and dusty lineoum which is on the floor near the stove and under her chair; and the dirty carpet which brings up the rear towards the back wall and under the bed. In two diagonal corners are two small worn out trunks, which are probably filled with some old clothes and her other things; while across from the door which leads into the dining room, sets a tall, brown regrigerator. The bareness of the walls that are smoothly planed, unpainted ceiling boards, is off-set by several old calendars with pictures, on three sides. By the bed a small radio sets on a table.
Asking her about her husband, and the kind of work he did, she says that her husband died about three years ago; that they had both been reared on a farm, about 12 miles from the court house, and had come to the mill 34 years ago. Three years before he died he lost his health; then he went into running a wood-yard, but couldnt do much except with the help of the boys. Now, that out of her eight childreen, two of whom are dead, all are married and gone except one who lives at another place in the village, with his wife and two children, and the boy who lives with her and supports her by working in the mill as a weaver at $18.00 a week. This son, she says, was always, a home boy; he never went around much, frlloicking, and never cared much about the girls. He is now 43 years old and never married. She seemed to be proud in the fact the he was in the World War, serving two months in the United States and ten months in France, in the ammunition train. He was not wounded in the war, she says.
Talking about when they came to Edgefield, about 22 years ago-- maybe you did not undetsand, she says, we have been in the county 34 years. She says she was a Johnson before she married; that her father was a farmer, and her grfather, too. Her gr-father came from Virginia and settled the same place they lived at about 12 miles below the town. Her husband, Marion Jackson, who was up in age when he died. "My son who lives with me, owns this house we live in, "she says; but he says that it takes everybit of his weekly wages to keep things going, that the old house takes money to keep it up.
"We don't have no automobile" she says, that her son don't want one;" he dont go to no picture show; he wus allus that er way." He goes to work in the afternoons at 2 o'clock and works until 10 O'clock that night, and inquiring how he spends his mornings, she says that he sometimes hangs around the store, or maybe work around his chickens and dig in the garden "You see that step-ladder in the corner by the frigerator," she says, "he uses it to work around here"....Again glancing around the room, it appears to be able to hold many things that are generally around a place, as even a tall, dark bureu or dress seems not to be crowded out of it's corner opposite to the "frigerator"...Then she says they have lots of trash piled around, have so much, dont have good places to put 'em.
"I used to git 'round good, "she says," cook, wash, and help around the garden; but I ain't no count no more". Ruminating about her health, she says that her doctor told her she had ulcerated stomach, is the reason she felt so done up all the time. Seems like, she says, that she can't eat much any more, except some kinds vegetable, like collards, and such; "but I drink sweetmilk," she says.
Her son gets up every morning at 6:30, she says, and piddles around the place, while to negro cook comes and cooks breakfast, which they have about 8 o'clock. This nero woman also does the washing and ironing and cleanin up. They have their washing done in the back yard, but they get their water out a well there, and don't have any city water. Though they have a electric lights which is from the town plant; the light bulb being seen as it hangs down almost to within three feet of the floor, in the center of the room.
Being asked if they had a base ball team at the mill, she says that they do; but her son dont go to the games, because, he says, it takes all his money to keep the old house up.
Talking about the schools around the mill, she says the little house near the mill is used as a union church and as a primary school. The bell, within a low tower, with no sides looks like those of olden times. Having lived in the country on a small farm, as a girl, she didnt get to go to school much. Anywhere from there months to five months each years, was all; and she went only three years. People didnt have much money to run schools then, she says, and then they had to be home in planting season and picking seasons.
She causally mentions her gr-children, the most of whom are grown and working for themselves. All of them have gone to the public schools, some going through High School. She thinks She thinks education is a fine thing for the children, the best thing for the present generation; then, for the first time, she seems proud of her grchildrens accomplishments when she mentions her gr-daughter who is in training to be a registered nurse. "She got but five more months to finish," she says, "she is a little thing, and weighs only 100 pounds." Asking how old she is, she replies that she is about 25 years old. Then, as in a thoughtful mood, she says," hope she will be as good a nurse as our mill nurse here--she shore is afine woman, good to me"...The loud ticking of the clock on the mantel, on each side of which are many pices of paper and small books, near the clock being that of what looks like the Bible, she does not appear to be disturbed by it, since, ho doubt, the customary habit of talking in the same room has made her used to it. Talking about some of her other gr-chuldren, she says that she has one grson who is 23 years old and in the 9th grade at school. It seems that this boy run away from home, lived in the States of Oregon and California, and other places, a few years; then he came back home, but because he couldnt get a Job around here he went back to scook, said he wanted to get more education. Another gr-son, son of another son, is in the 11th grade in high school and is only 15 years old, she says. Says he is a smart boy, helps his father when he got unable to work much, by staying in the store for him in the afternoons. The brother who works in mill in the afternoons and night, stays in the store in the mornings.
Then she wants to know if I know anything about farming; Says her boy likes it, and would like to go on it again, but he reckon he better stay in the mill as he might do better. He likes the mill alright, she says, and likes his boss and super. He don't belong to no union around here, but my married son over yonder likes it," she says. "My son here votes; he is a Democrat, but that's all he does-- he dont work for nobody to help git em elected." "Once I voted," she continues, "only one time, and that wus 'nough fur me." She says that her doctor run for some office, and she wasnt goin' to vote; "but when folks commenced to try to turn me aginst him, I went down and voted fur him." Everybody makes out they are Democrats around here, she says.....
"We got a holiness church over there on tother side of street, you saw it. It is painted white, trimmed in green. They get up some action over there somtimes when they have big meetin'. "Explaining that the union cgurch was used by both the Methodist and the Baptist, she says that she is a Methodist, and still keeps her membership in her old church down in the country where they came from; because her people belonged there and all of them are buried in the church cemetery. She used to go to the Methodist meeting sometimes here and in the country, but cant get about now. But, she says, the holiness church now has more members than the others. They make small contribution to their church sometimes, she says...
"My son," she says, "who lives with me is mighty good to me, and took care of me and his pa, too, mighty good." "If I wus dead," she says, "and he could git a good woman, I would like fer him to marry; but ef he can't git a good one, would he would go to the veterans hospital, than to git jist any kind of a woman." Talking about one of her sons who had died and left a widow and some children, she says that he woned his home, and run a little store in the village. She sya that she talked about him while ag Well, she says, his wife worked in the mill, to, while he worked, both regular and they saved up enough to buy this little home, and then to start their little store. After he died, she went on working in the mill regular, and th children went to school.. "I tell you, she shore is a worker.... she knows how to git along", she says..... One of her grsons now has a store (he is a son of this widow), and he is doing fine, she says.
Asking her if she had any furniture her old grparents used, sh says, yes, some old chairs and a table. Smiling a little, she says that she would show them. Getting up she beckons you to follow her to the back of the house. Goung through the dining room, which appears to be also the kitchen, you see a large old-time dininb table, made of pine, but round and having a smaller round turn-table on it which spins around when it is turned. Opening the kitchen door to the back porch, a narrow long strip with rough banisters, you see against the wall two unpainted chairs of the home made tupe, with about 1/2 inch hickory strips plaited for the seat. By the side of these is a table about four feet high, three feet wide and two feet long; with the-unusual feat of having the square tapering legs nailed with wooden pegs through the panels that fit in grooves just under the table top. It, too, shows evidence of not having ever been stained or printed. Coming back through the dining room and kitchen room, you observe also a cabinet of home made style, back in a corner. The dining table is covered all over with an oil cloth of blue and and wire designs. The floor is bare, not even a sign of a carpet or ug, but had been swept clean. She tels how her mother used to eat from the table. Talking about her mother, she tells of the work her mother did as a weaver. She says that the mother was an expert weaver, worked on an old wooden hand loom which was kept in one corner of the kitchen, and people from everywhere would bring their yarn to her to have it wove into cloth.
The caller gets up and starts to go, then she tells of an auto wreck that happened not far from there, near a road-house, she says. She reckons they wus drunk, cause they that go to the road house, get drunk, they tells me, she says. They sell liquor there, too, so they say, and she begins to mildly berate the authorities for not arresting drunk fellows sometimes. "When they kecth a nigger," she says, "they take him in and put him up." Talking about the white fellows who drink liquor around there and get drunk, she says, if they get much drunk they must stay at home, cause you dont hardly ever see any drunk out, or nobody knows about it.
Then, she says that she hadnt told about living in Newberry once. That she moved to Newberry and lived in the old mill, West End, 19 months, and come back to Edgefield in 1910. She says that she liked it there, the people in the mill wus good, but they just wanted to come back home. Relaxing in her chair, a noise; was heard at the front door. Going to it, she could see nothing, and then said, "them children here, I reckon, trying to get in", and with that straggles back to her chair, and the Cellar departs.
February 2, 1939.
John Harrison Summer, (white)
Main Street
Newberry, S. C.
Merchant.
G. Leland Summer, Writer.
My clothing and shoe store which I run here is a small business. I hire only one clerk. Before the World War, I had a bigger business in a large store up on the corner. Then I hired four clerks and a book-keeper. I am getting pretty old now, and can't stand on my feet much. I am 79 years old.
I got up in the mornings about 6 o'clock. Have done this nearly all my life. Get my dinner at about 1:00 o'clock; then, my wife comes for me in the car and we hare supper around 7 o'clock. Close my store at 6 O'clock every evening. Years ago we use to keep opne until 7:30 or 8 o'clock in evening.
My father died in the Confederate Army hospital, Richmond, Va. in the latter part of 1862. He had started a home in 1857, just after he and my mother had married; but everybody talking war, stopped the building, and it was after the war that mother finished building it herself. It is the old two-tory white house below <text not clear> that John H lives in now. I married and lived in that house the first threes, then we moved to Newberry and started a business, that was in 1884. Brother Geo came with me and we went in together, in partnership. About 1888 my other brother came and bought an interest in the partnership.
My mother was a good business woman; besides raising three boys, she completed her home, and then bought another two-horse farm in the enighborhood and paid for it.
In the year 1888 we opened another larger grocery store on the corner of Main and Caldwell Streets, in Newberry, and used the old grocery stand for a dry goods store. We began the lean business, too, and began to grow. In another few years we had bought two additional stores-- grocery, flour and grain, and hardware-- making three stores to operate. Having bought a large clothing business over at opposite corner, we began to do more business each year. During this time, we organized and started the first bonded cotton warehouse in Newberry, which in later years we sold to the Standard ware house Company, of Columbia, S. C. G.M.B. Epting was in with us and we made him the active manager. He liked his work. Negroes who worked around the warehouse liked him. On Saturdays he and his negroes would take a drink of whiskey which he kept in the office. Saturday afternnons and Saturday nights were big times for the negroes.
I was married twice. My first wife had 8 children. My second wife has one daughter.
I didnt get much chance to go to school when a boy, on account of the war. Went to the Cross Roads school and St John Academy. The folks wanted me to go to college, but I wouldnt go. I was a kind of home-boy. Never liked to go to around to places away from home much. But I did like to dance and liked fine horses when I was a boy. Went hunting and fishing little bit.
When the war was over, we had a tough time. Mother was afraid the Yankees--Shermans army-- would come through; and sure enough one day a we heard them coming up the road; with the drums beatin' and the tram of the feet sounding. Mother grabs up the picture of father, takes us boys by the hands, locks the doors, and stopping at a big tree in the front yard and covering the picture under some leaves, we all run over to her fathers place, about one mile away. We spent the night there and when we come back next day, mother looked for the -picture but she didnt find it. It had rained that night.
Yes, we have been here nearly 55 years, During all that time we have helped in every entarise in town. We helped organize and start the first oil mill plant whih was later sold to the Southern Oil mill. We started a little handle and shuttle factory. In 1901 we organized and started the Mollohon Mfg Company, a cotton cloth mill, with capital stock of $200,000.00. A few years afwrads the mill was doubled to its capacity, and the capital stock increased to $500,000.00. Brother George was the first and only President of the mill, until they sold out to Northern interests a few years ago. We started the Newberry Lumber Company which we had bought from the Davis plant.
I'll go back and tell you what kind of store I used to run. I was always the manager of the Dry goods or clothing stores. All the streets had mulberry tress on the edges of the sidewalks, then. The side-walks were paved with large flat rocks, in an irregular and uneven way. The streets had no pavements; only mud when it rained. One time old man poole put some rock about eight inches down under the streets, to keep wagons and buggies from mireing up too deep and get stalled.
There used to be a saloon right in front of our first store. I was standing in our front door one day, and heard a pistol shoot across the street in the saloon. Then a man, wounded and bleeding staggered out of the door, and fell dead in the door. His name was Reeder. They said that a young fellow named Jason shot him. They were both drunk and had been quarreling.
I lived in two different houses when I first come here; but in the present house, a large colonial designed home, I built about 32 years ago, before my first wife died. She died in 1917. She planted lots of flowers, and always kept a hot house for her flowers, in the back yard. My second wife likes flowers, too, and she keeps the lawn green and smooth the year 'round, and shrubbery around the house.
We used to run many croppers in our store, on liens. With the four stores, the warehouse, wagon and buggy storage house, and the seed and fertilizer warehouse over at the depot, a guess we did as much or more business in the State as any other firm. One time we built five brick stores on lower Main Street. In one of them we run a furniture store awhile, but soon sold it out. We sold the stores, too. The horse and buggy days. The clerks used to like to go to the warehouse and assemble the wagons and buggies. It was fun to put them together. We sold coal, too, for several years over at the depot warehouse. One of the clerks made something that he got up, to empty coal quick from rear end of wagon. Made it so bolt slip out and back come open quick. He took another feller and went over to the Davis lumber shop and made it out of oak wood.
I always kept good horses and good buggies for my familys use. I liked good horses. The first little horse I had was a sorrel mare. She was a peach of a horse. Once I had a big bay horse which we kept to the dray, but he got killed when brother rode hits over to where they had a land sale. He must have got the bellows. Our firm had three good horses all the time, two for the large, heavy dray and one for the one-horse dray. We divided up, each one of us taking a horse. My horse was old Dixie which I used for a family horse. Old Prince which I bought later was the best family horse I ever had. I used to have a large, high two seated carriage. I bought my wife one of the low seated sulkies that had rubber tires and wire wheels, steel plated, which she drove old Dixie to for a long time. I bought my oldest daughter a side-saddle when she was seven years old, and she rode old Dixie a few times; but her mother didnt like for her to ride as she thought the girl too young. That was 40 years ago. And you know, a few days ago, I found that old saddle up in one attic of my home. I thought I had sold it a long time ago. Another old horse I bought from Fred Schumpert. I paid $75.00 cash for him. I sold old Prince, the buggy and harness for $175.00. and never bought any other horse. But bought an auotmobile a little while afterwards. My carriage had cost me $200.00.
When my oldest boys were growing up I used to make them work aroun the house, milk cows and do other things, except work the garden. That has always been my job. We had a good croquet ground in the back yard, and they would invite neighbors children in and play. Then the boys played base ball on the ground or in the side streets.
I always went about end attended to my own business. Never went much for vacations. I never-did like to travel; but brothers used to like to travel. Brother Geo who was President of the mill used to go to New York, Philadelphia and other places often. He once had interests in two mills in Georgia and three in this State. He was Vice-President of two of them while he was President of the one here in Newberry. We always went to church nearly every Sunday. Had our children go to church and Sunday School.
My interest has always been in my business. Never took part in any polities.
We used to raise hogs in town. Everybody had back lot with a hog. The twon used to send a man around to inspect it, but soon they passed a law stopping the keeping of hogs in town. Same way with milk cows.
In my store I have seen styles change. Have seen how the people wants for things change. Times are better; but people wont pay their debts like they used to do. You could trust people more in the old days. Too many will beat you now. When I first come to this town, everybody wore black ten-cents hose. Whites and blacks. They wanted no colors in hose. The country people wore red bandanna handkerchiefs, wide brimmed hats, that were gray for men, and women wore hats trimmed with lots of flowers. Men wore leather boots or shoes that they slipped on. The boys wore red-top boots that slipped on and had copper toes. The boys wore copper-toes shoes, sometimes, too. Country people didnt wear overalls then, nor any workers in town, either. They wore jeans pants. They bought jeans cloth, took it home, and the women folks made jeans work clothes out of it. Women wore checkered homespun and outing cloth. Maybe a calico dress. Men and women wore red flannels underwear fifty years ago, made in two pieces, in the Winter time. They didnt make union suits then, and had no silk hosiery. Everything was cotton. Mens' shirts opened in the back; but the stiff-bussomed shirt sometimes opened on side in front, with is studd in it. Fifty cents could buy a good shirt those days.
Folks used to walk to church in town, let their horses rest at home on Sundays. There were not many buggies then, a few old, high carriages. People liked to walk. They dressed up on Sunday Afternoons in their swing-tail coats, silk beavers and walking cones. Walking sticks were the best of style then. The first Summer I was here, I bought for $5.00 a "sear-sucker" coat from a Jew named Moses Epstein, says K. And I bought a striped pair of pants. I had two alpaca coats and vests. In 1880 I bought a black cut-a-way coat, wore it two or three times, and decided I didnt like it. I got married in it, and afterwards sold it. Lots of young fellows used black broadcloth. People then married in black, went to church in black, went to socials in black, and were buried in black. Then the old "swing-tail" coat came into style. I bought one and didnt like it. Then I bought a Prince Albert coat and vest, and later sold it to a negro preacher. I remember when old man E. A. used come up the street dressed in his Prince Albert, his high, I sleek beaver, and walking cane. Then, the square cut coat came in style, with double breast. People then started buying suits, pants and coats same color. The old black frock-tailed coat and striped trousers and white vest with black shoes were still in good style, for few years more. The highest priced shoe in town then was $ 3.00. Some poeple wore "gaiters", with elastic sides but slipped on without being fastened. One fellow bought some "Zeiglar" shoes in the <text not clear> pf Prosperity, and paid $6.00 for them. He said he bought a pair of gaiters that had six buttons on the outside of each shoe, a kind of imitation button shoe, but they slipped on the feet. The buttons on the side were as ornaments. I remember when men wore button shoes. They had to button them up, high shoes and not slippers. One old doctor used to wear "Cecilian coats". Every Summer he had to get his "Cecilian." Or his Mohair. I havent seen any of the Mohair in the last five years. Old Mr. M. used to ride his horse with a frock-tail coat. When he got up on the horse he was careful about spreading- a coat-tail on each side of the horse so the coat woundt get wrinkled or soiled.
People fifty years ago used to have one little ice house in town. Lots every body had to go to the ice house in town and buy their ice. The ice was shipped in in saw-dust freight cars. Later, they had a little cover cart or one-horse wagon, which they drove around to peoples houses, rang their hand bell, like a dinner bell. Then, you had to go out to the wagon with your cloth or small quilt and get your five-cents worth of ice. That is about all they bought at a time, then mostly for sickness. Milk and butter was kept in milk houses in the backyard. The well supplied fresh water to the trough for milk, which was re-filled once a day. Meats were kept hanging up in smoke houses in the back-yard.
On dull days people just set round in stores and talk, or in front of store doors and talked. Some would straighten out stock on rainy days and no customers come about. One man always had a checker board handy and played in store or on street, under the shade of a mulberry tree.
I remember an old negro, a character, who used to be on the street all the time. Everybody called him "Fish Dick". He walked up and down the street with a basket on his arm filled with fish, crying, "Fish, fresh fish," or, "Fresh shad for sale." He kept his fish in an ice box at his fish stand and would take out a few at a time and peddle them up and down the street. Another old negro character was Old Ben, the well-digger. He dug many wells around town and at new houses. Old Appleton Elmore who come from out on Bush River, lived around town, and was a saddle-maker. He made some good saddles. K says he made for his grmother a saddle that cost her $40.00. His gr-mother gave it to her sister.
The young men in those days would shoot targets with shot guns or rifles. Then theybstarted to shooting clay pigeons. I never did hunt any after I come to Newberry. Used to keep bird dogs and a one hound dog on our piece on the farm, and hunted lots then.
I am getting old. Wish I could sell my business, and get out of it. Wish I could do something with some old stock I got up-stairs. Business is not like it used to be. People dont have as much money as they used to have. Maybe the chain stores getting all the cash trade. We got more Jews in town than we very had before, since I been here. They make money. I dont carry high priced goods like I used to carry. I let my son who got a business carry the higher priced lines.
