How he learned English
by
Robert W. Holmes
There are only two Greeks in Davidson County, both residing in Thomasville, where they operate a small lunch room.
The older of the two, Dimitrios A. Kahahalios, was born in Karpenisi, Greece. He left home at the age of fourteen and went to work in a cafe in Constantinople. He married a Greek woman there but did not come to this country until he was twenty-eight, which was in 1914. He had an uncle in Orangeburg, S. C. from whom he heard he could make plenty of money in America.
Kahahalios landed in New York after an uneventful sea voyage which he discribed as: "I little seasick but I always eat." He worked in a cafe in New York City for about a year and a half. Instead of going out and having "bigga time" he studied English in his spare time, learning it word by word. He would pick up the salt and pepper shakers and pronounce the names, "salt", "peppa".
When he left New York he went to work for his uncle in Orangeburg, S. C. but stayed there only about a year. He then began to migrate; operated cafes in Columbia, S. C. two years; Florence, S. C. six months; Rockingham, N.C. and Sumter, S.C. two years; Greensboro, N. C. eight or ten years, and has been in Thomasville four years. He has nearly always been in partnership with another Greek but the partnerships do not always prove successful so he sells out and moves to another place. He has never worked anywhere except in cafes and restaurants.
Kahahalios cannot read Greek or English and is not a naturalized American citizen although he wouldvery much like to be, so he could bring his wife to America. He has never been back to Greece since he came here in 1914.
He belongs to the Greek society, Ahepa, and to the Moose lodge. He is a member of the Greek Orthodox church which he attends in Winston-Salem. He attends the Ahepa in Greensboro and the Moose in Thomasville. He rooms at a hotel in Thomasville. When asked if he had had any trouble making a living in this country he replied: "No troubles tall, everybody like dis countree."
Dionisios (Dennis) Plakas is associated with Kahahalios in the cafe business in Thomasville. The name of their business is "City Quick Lunch."
Plakas also came from Karpenisi, Greece. He sailed from Patras and landed in New York July 14, 1920, along with other Greeks, "Turkeys" and Syrians. He did not stay in New York but went at once to Petersburg, Va.
where he had cousins. He stayed in Petersburg two years where he "pick him up" English word by word. He then began to migrate. He lived twenty-eight months in Greensboro, thirty-two months in Wilmington, twenty-three months in Florence and some time (4 years) in Charlotte. He had as soon live in one place as another just so he is making money.
Plakas has a wife and two daughters in Karpenisi, Greece and has been back to see them five times, having crossed the ocean nine times, he proudly asserts. He was twenty-six years old when he made the first crossing. In Greece he was "alla time in the army" and he came to America because he heard he could make a good living here. He has always been in cafe work since he has been in this country.
He can read and write Greek and English but only has his first papers towards naturalization.
Plakas and Kahahalios could speak Turkish at one time but have now forgotten it. Plakas is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church. He came to Thomasville about two months ago to go into business with Kahahalios because he had known him previously.
These Greeks areverycongenial fellows andvery are willing to give information about themselves if it would help the country of their adoption.
GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
Elizabeth City
<text not clear>
There are fourteen native Greeks in Elizabeth City, N. C., five of whom are married, 6 of whom are naturalized. Three have married native American wives and two have built homes and are rearing families. One married in his old country; another married in France and is bringing his family to America.
Elizabeth City Greeks are law-abiding, sober, industrious, self-supporting and accepted as a wholesome cross section of the local population. If they have differences amongst themselves, they settle them amongst themselves. They have never been subject of indictment in any criminal or civil action, except for one lone individual who has become so thoroughly Americanized that he gets drunk once or twice a year, at which time the police say "he is fussy, but gives them no trouble."
All members of the colony were originally members of the Greek Orthodox Church, but most of them have dropped their church memberships, there being no Greek Church in Elizabeth City. Two have affiliated with local Protestant Christian Churches.
The first Greek to settle in Elizabeth City was Harry G. Paulos, deceased, who established a successful restaurant here about 35 years ago. He married a local girl, native American, acquired a small farm home near the city and is survived by his wife and five children, the three elder boys of whom are holding good positions, one of them assistant manager of one of the leading chain stores in this city.
W. O. Saumders
GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
From W. O. Saunders
Greeks in Elizabeth City, N. C.
George C. Wooler, age 51; prop.; came to this country about 1912 from Gralista, Greece; naturalized about 1928; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; married to Arestea G. Manos Wooler, age 35; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; naturalized in 1931; no children; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church.
Bill S. Manos, age 38; waiter; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; not naturalized; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; unmarried.
Staurola Manos, female; age 67; does not work, came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; not naturalized; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; speaks very little English.
Charles Manos, age 32; prop.; came to this country in 1915 from Gralista, Greece; will soon get naturalization papers; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; unmarried.
John Kambis, Kambitsis real name; partner; age 47; married French girl whom he met while in the Army in France.
Wife, who joined him in America, leaving their three children, all girls, in the old country, is now in Greece to bring them to America. Girls speak and write Greek, French and English. Kambis has been in this country 30 years; naturalized 1920; was in the Army during the World War; belongs to Greek Orthodox Church; came from Cephalonia, Greece. Jerry Kambis, real name Kambitsis; age 45; prop; came to this country in 1920 from Cephalonia, Greece; not naturalized lost first papers; did belong to Greek Orthodox Church but now belongs to Presbyterian Church; married American girl; no children.
Nick Tawfas, age 23 or 24; prop.; came to this country in 1915; has first naturalization papers; belongs to First Christian Church; married an American girl; has 1 boy.
Gus Giftiamkis, age 48, prop.; came to this country in 1920; got first naturalization papers and lost them; belongs to First Christian Church; unmarried. George P. Stamatis, age 55; prop.; came to this country in 1907; got first naturalization papers but lost them, going to try to get more; belongs to First Christian Church; unmarried.
Angelo Mandos, age 32, chef at Central Cafe; not naturalized; no religious affiliation; unmarried. Christ Paulos, age 29; assistant chef at Central Cafe; not naturalized; no religious affiliation; plans to marry American girl; also plans to get naturalization papers.
George Sfetsos, age 45; partner in Central Cafe; came to this country from near Athens, Greece; has naturalization papers; married to American wife; has two children.
Gus Constantine Geraris, age 31; head prop, in Fort Raleigh Grill; naturalized; no religious affiliation; unmarried.
Nicholas Harry Paulos, age 41; head prop. in Central Cafe; came to this country from Cephalonia in 1916; naturalized; no religious affiliation; married American girl of German-American descent; has 6 children.
PERSONAL LIFE HISTORY
Gus Constantin Geraris
Greek Restaurateur
107 N. Poindexter Street
Elizabeth City, N. C.
Writer: W. O. Saunders
WHY SO MANY GREEK RESTAURANTS?
WHY SO MANY GREEK RESTAURANTS?
Pete has a great little restaurant. He buys his steaks from a Chicago packer specializing in "top choice" ribs and loins. He uses a fine blend of coffee and serves real cream with his coffee. Gold storage eggs and ersatz butter never enter into his cuisine. His fixtures are modern; his kitchen a model of orderliness and efficiency. And Pete is forever busy. When he isn't waiting on tables, ringing up sales or inquiring after the pleasure and comfort of patrons, he is filling up sugar bowls and salts and peppers, packing his butter tray, scalding out the coffee urns, replenishing his ice cubes, folding napkins, polishing glasses, mopping up, putting things generally to rights. I had to get his story in broken installments.
Drawing himself a cup of coffee during a morning's lull he dropped down beside me at the lunch counter.
"Are you always busy like this?" I asked him.
"Always," he replied; "there is always something to do in a dining room if you try to run a first class place and hold customers. I learned that long ago on an ocean liner and I have never forgotten it.
"I was dining room helper on this liner. One dayafter lunch, when all the dishes had been taken back to the kitchen, the table cloths changed and the sideboard put in order, I sat down and opened up a magazine.
"The head steward came along and asked me what I meant by sitting down with a magazine?
"I told him I thought I was through with my work until the next meal time.
"He said to me, 'Your work is never done in a dining room as long as you keep your eyes open.'
"Always something to do as long as you keep your eyes open: It is true. I never forget that."
In a succession of such interviews I pieced together his personal life history of a typical Greek-American restaurateur, such a fellow as one will find in almost any small town or city in America. His story, interspersed with more or less of his comment on life and its livers, makes up like this:
"My family name is Petrakis; everybody calls me Pete for short. When I got my naturalization papers in 1925 I gave Pete as my first name.
"I was born in the village of Dervenion near the ancient greek city of Corinth. Dervenion was a rural village where the people lived by agriculture and fishing. My people, like most villagers, grew fruits and vegetables and raised flax from which they spun and wove their own linen and made the cloth, on hand looms, from which most of our clothing was made. We made wine and olive oil and cured raisins, much of which we sold for cash. Our food was simple; bread and cheese, fruits and vegetables, with occasional meat or fish meals.
"When I was 12 years old I went to Piraeus, the seaport town of Athens, to live with an uncle. He was a pharmacist and I worked in his drug store. And it was a drug store; no soda fountain, no cigar counter, no confectioneries, no novelties.
"At Piraeus ships came from all parts of the world. A Greek boy with lots of curiosity about the world of which he had learned much in school could hardly escape the call of the sea at Piraeus. When I was 14 years old I shipped, on a British steamer bound for Australia.
"For six years I roamed the seven seas on everything from tramp freighters to ocean liners. I crossed the Atlantic 17 times, went twice around Gape Horn, crossed the Pacific three times, visited first and last 28 countries.
I worked as coal passer, fireman, deckhand and dining room helper.
"Once I almost lost my life. It was on a British steamer, loaded with munitions, bound from New York to Havre in October 1917. We were torpedoed by a German submarine without warning, about four o'clock one morning, about halfway the Atlantic Ocean. There were 52, men on board. All jumped into the water, many without other than the clothes they slept in. No time to lower a life boat or find a life preserver. By clinging to pieces of timber that floated up from the sinking ship 17 of us managed to survive and were rescued by an American destroyer after being in the water for 49 hours. We were nearly frozen and dead from the waist up. We had been in the chilly ocean more than two days without food or water. They had to revive us slowly, so nearly frozen were we. One of our men died after being taken from the water.
"I made good money in my years at sea. Wages were usually good and the tips were good when I got into the dining saloons. On a trip from Cape Town or Singapore to Liverpool the tips would sometimes amount to 20 pounds, or about $100 in American money.
"But money wasn't all I got out of my sea-going; it was an education for me, seeing new lands and meeting strange people, taking in their customs, their manners and their ways of living. My mathematics was helped too, learning the rates of exchange and how to figure in the currency of the many countries I visited.
"And, believe me, a fellow traveling all round the world has a lot to learn. I had to learn that P. M. in Greece means one thing, and in England the opposite thing. I got shore leave one day from my ship at Liverpool. I inquired as to when the ship was to sail so I wouldn't over stay my leave. I was told the ship sailed at 6 P. M. Now in my country P. M. means Before Noon; but in England it means After Noon. I got back to my ship's dock about midnight to find that the ship had sailed six hours earlier. And there I was stranded in Liverpool without money or a change of clothing. But I found another Greek fellow who took me to the Greek Consular agent who helped me out and got another berth for me.
"What was the greatest thing I learned in all my travels? Well, maybe, it was that people are just people wherever you find them; black men, yellow men, brown men, white men -- all just human. All eat, sleep, love women, love babies, like their fun and treat you right if you treat them right. I have never found but one race of people I don't like, and I don't dislike all of them. They are the people who think they are better than everyone else; they push, they shove, they sneer, they want more for their money than anybody else. If I had to depend on their trade I would close up my business.
"How I came to locate in America was like this. I was a member of the International Seaman's Union. The union called a strike on my ship which docked at Norfolk in 1921. While we were still on strike the ship got another crew and sailed. I was stranded in Norfolk.
"I couldn't get another berth right away but I had a little money; $944 in fact. I was 25 days out of work and had spent $25 when I got a job driving, a bread wagon for a Greek bakery. I had learned to speak a little English. I drove that bread wagon for six years. I had only 15 restaurants on my route when I started. When I left I had 111 restaurants on my route and was making $175 a month.
"In those days, making good money, I tried to live like a big shot; I owned a big car, gambled, played the ponies, thought nothing of taking a day off to see a prize fight. But I found it didn't pay; that I'd never get ahead that way. I was making the mistake that most people in this country make -- spending more than I could make.
"For three years I attended an Americanization night school in Norfolk, learning to speak English. The principal of the school told me I should take out citizenship papers. I was afraid to do this, because I had entered the country illegally. But the principal of the school, a mighty fine woman, told me what I should do to get my papers and helped me to make up my record.
"I came to North Carolina in 1932 to help another Greek that I had struck up a friendship with in Norfolk. I came to help him for two weeks in his restaurant and stayed with him six years. I worked hard, saved my money, made friends and went into the restaurant business with a partner in 1938. My partner knows the kitchen end; I know the dining room end; we have been very successful. People have been very kind to me."
"Tell me, "I asked: Why do so many Greek people come to America and go into the restaurant business?"
"As simple as hot cakes," he replied. "A Greek comes to America; he can speak little English; he doesn't feel himself above any kind of work. In looking about for a job he finds dish washers in demand. He gets a job in a hotel or restaurant kitchen washing dishes. He learns to cook. He gets five or six hundred dollars ahead and opens a little restaurant of his own.
"We are used to work, used to long hours, we are a sober people, our eyes are bright, we don't always waste money.
The Ahepa tells us that no member of its society has ever died in the electric chair or served a life term in prison.
"And what is the Ahepa?" I asked.
"The Ahepa is the American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association. It aids American citizens of Hellenic descent to become better Americans. The Ahepa strives to bring the best in Hellenism to the solution of the problems of America. It teaches loyalty. It tries to keep our people from being a relief problem; it is building homes for the aged and orphans in Florida; it maintains a fine tuberculosis sanitarium in New Mexico and provides $200 for every family of a deceased member. It's a fine order; it keeps us Greek Americans on our toes.
"I crossedthe Atlantic my last time in 1937; I went back to visit my old home and my people for the first time in 21 years, Everything had changed, except the people.
"When I left homeas a small boy we had no automobiles, no electric lights, no telephones, no rouge, no lipsticks. All this had changed; automobiles, busses, trucks, electric lights everywhere. The telephone and telegraph had come to our Village. The girls were using rouge and lipsticks, just as in America.
"But the greatest change had come in our government. Our country was ruled by rich men when I was a boy. In our village, for instance, five or six rich men living in their palaces took almost everything the people made. The people were always in debt to them. They owned the stores and we had to buy from them at their own prices. When we sold our olive oil, our wine, our raisins, our fruits and our vegetables these rich men got together and fixed the prices they should pay us. We were always in debt to them. They charged high rates of interest.
"All this has changed. The government now lends money to the little man on the farm. The drachma has been devalued. Five drachmas were worth a dollar in American money when I left home. When I went back a dollar would buy 108 or 112 drachmas. And the government had said to the rich men that they must accept the drachma at its old value in payments on debts, and give the debtor 12 years to pay. I saw some of these big men, living in palaces, going to work same as little men. The little man is no longer bound to the rich man. He doesn't have to sell his fruits and vegetables, his wine and olive oil, to a few rich men who fix prices; motor trucks take his produce to the markets in Athens.
"Another thing, I found Greeks and Turks who were once always at war with one another, now living on terms of peace and like good neighbors.
"Many wise changes have been made by our new government. Any boy out of high school could go to college and study to be a lawyer, a doctor, a teacher or an engineer. Result was too many doctors, too many lawyers, too many teachers, too many engineers. Not all of them could make a living; some of them became crooks.
"Now the government fixes the quotas, how many lawyers, how many doctors, how many teachers, how many engineers the colleges may turn out. Only the students who make the highest marks are selected to fill the quotas. Wouldn't that be a good thing for America to copy? Wouldn't we have fewer crooked lawyers, fewer crooked doctors and fewer teachers and engineers of what you call mediocre ability?"
"Do you plan to go back to the old country to spend your last years?" I asked.
"No; I do not think I shall go back; I am used to America and American ways now; and it is so much easier to make a living in America. A Greek can make enough in one week over here to live a month on. One does well in the old country to make enough in a month to live half as well for a week as he could live in America.
"America is a land of easy money. There is more money in America and strange to say, more suffering than in the old countries. The trouble in America is easy credit. It is so easy for a fellow making $25 a week to try to live like a fellow making a hundred dollars a week. You can buy a suite of furniture for a dollar down and a dollar a week; a radio or a suit of clothes the same way. You can buy an automobile on time, trading in your old car as down payment. Credit is too easy.
"This restaurant you see here represents an investment of $10,000; me and my partner had only a thousand apiece to put in it to start. We would have had to put in $5,000 to start a $10,000 business in the old country. Yes, this America is a great country.
"No: I don't think I shall ever go back to the old country except for a visit. It has nothing much to offer me since I became accustomed to the American way of life.
"Still my old country has its good points. If we Greeks are a law-abiding people it is because we have lived all our lives under strict laws. Our laws are not loose as in America. Our towns and villages don't make their own laws; all laws are Federal laws; all our judges are Federal judges; even the policemen are Federal employees. A federal judge tries you for even a petty misdemeanor. And to keep our judges free from personal bias and favoritism, they shift the judges from province to province, never letting a judge stay in one town long enough to form friendships that might warp his judgment; The same way with policemen; they are not kept long in any one place.
"But we Greeks are in some ways a peculiar people. If any person offends or insults us, or wrongs us in anyway, we never have anything more to do with him. He may beg our pardon a thousand times, and we may forgive him; but we never have anything to do withhim any more, for the man who insults you, abuses you or lies to you is by nature an ignorant or mean person that you can not afford to trust or respect. We don't take any more chances with an ignorant or evil fellow when we get -- what you call it -- his number."
GREEK STUDY NORTH CAROLINA
Statement by Gus Constantine Geraris
Prop. Fort Raleigh Grill
Elizabeth City, N. C.
"We like olive oil for frying our food; we used nothing but olive oil in the old country. Over here olive oil pretty expensive, we use mostly Wesson oil. We use some lard too, but lard not so good. Many small Greek restaurants get a bad name for greasy foods by using lard. Lard burns easy and smells bad. I don't like lard.
"Oh yes, we are very fond of garlic; we use it on all our roasts and in our gravies -- just a little bit, because most American people don't like to taste the garlic in their foods.
"Now, if you want something good, stuff a fish with a bread dressing with lots of garlic in it and make a sauce of olive oil and lemon juice whipped together like mayonnaise and highly flavored with garlic. That's the way I like my fish; wouldn't go so well in ray restaurant -- most of my customers would walk out on me."
W. O. Saunders
Nichols Lykiarbopulos was his name before he got his citizenship papers in the U. S. Court at Elizabeth City in March 1939. He is not Nicholas Harry Polus; the middle name from his rather whose baptismal name was Haralambos, the Greek equivalent of the English Harry; the last name Polus is from the last five letters of his native name. He is a native of the rocky isle of Cephalonia, in the Ionian Sea between Greece and Italy.
"I left my home in Cephalonia when I was 15 years old," says Mr. Polus. "Cephalonia is a beautiful place to live if you have money; but its all rocks, you can't make money there. That's why most boys in Cephalonia leave home and go to sea.
"I was a seaman when I left home. My ship landed at Philadelphia on Sept. 1, 1916. I decided to leave the ship and see some of America. I didn't have a nickel when I landed. May pay on ship was $35 a month, but I spent it all except a little I sent home to my people.
"I had an uncle in New York. I wired him for money to get to New York. He sent me the money and when I got to New York he got me a Job in a restaurant, washing dishes. The job paid $55 a month and the hours were twelve hours a day, seven days a week. Hard work but I didn't mind. I stayed on that job six or eight months and then went to Akron, Ohio, to work in a rubber factory.
After four or five months I went back to the same restaurant in New York as a night cook. I and worked up to cook's helper before I left to go to Akron.
"I had a cousin of the same name, a sea captain, who was building a small ship at Elizabeth City. He told me I'd work myself to death if I stayed in that restaurant; to come down to Elizabeth City and he would pay me $55 a month just to lay around.
"I came to Elizabeth City in June 1918. But I just couldn't lay around; I wanted to work. In three days after I came here I had a job as head cook in the Busy Bee Cafe at $80 a month.
"In 1924 I opened my own restaurant and lunch counter, just a little place on a side street. I made money. "In 1927 I formed a partnership with another Greek, George Lekas and we opened the Central Cafe on McMorine, Street just around the corner from Main Street. We spent a lot of money on the Central and it was the finest restaurant in town. We made money for several years -- $12,000 in one year. And then we ended the partnership. I bought the business.
"In 1935 I moved around on Mein street in the best business block, next door to the leading theatre, with a side entrance from the theatre lobby. The New Central was a finer restaurant. In 1939 I remodeled the Central, modernized it.
"I married an Elizabeth City girl whose parents were German-Americans, in 1926. We have built our own home. In 1937 my wife visited the old country with me. First time I had been back since I left as a boy 15 years old.
"It was almost like a new country to me. I left home so young that I had formed flew ideas about it and when I went back after 21 years I must confess I was vary ignorant about my country. But we enjoyed our visit. Wish I could go back once a year.
"Of course I wouldn't want to go back to stay. Work is more plentiful here, living conditions much better here, and plenty opportunities to make money if you want to work. I want my children brought up in America.
"You ask me about my religion, I belonged to the Orthodox Greek Church when I was a boy but it doesn't seem to me I got much out of it. I got more out of religion taught in schools, Religion is taught in the schools in my country, an important part of our education.
"I belong to no church in this country. I go to all Protestant churches when I find time. The nearest Orthodox Greek Church is in Narfolk, Virginia. I do not belong to it;I give them money when they send their collectors around; it's the same thing. They don't send a collector around often; sometimes twice a year, sometimes only once. Sometimes the priest comes with him. I wouldn't takemy children to the Greek Church. They still stick to the Greek language in their services and it wouldn't mean a thing to my children. Tell you the truth: I think the Greek Church in America will soon be a thing of the past if they don't change to English. The old timers are passing out; the Greek language doesn't mean much to the young Greek language doesn't mean much to the young Greek grown up in America.
"I like your Protestant churches; everything plain, simple, friendly. I want my children to choose their own church, if they want to join a church.
"We Greeks are criticized because we speak in our own language when talking to one another. I think we would speak better English if we dropped our Greek altogether. But when we talk among outselves our own language is much quicker; it's easier to find the words to say just what we want to say. In giving orders to my help in the kitchen they get my orders better in the Greek language than they would in English".
It seemd to me that I had heard of infant baptism in the Orthodox Greek ritual at Nick's (about the only name he is known by locally) home. I asked him, about this. "You tell me you belong to no church end that you want your children to choose their own church. Why then do you commit them by baptism to the Greek orthodox church?"
He smiled, shrugged his shoulders and said, 'Oh, I don't know; just an old custom; my people in the old country expect it; and it's a fine thing; sort of holiday for us; the priest comes out from Norfolk, there's the Greek Ceremony, lots offriends come in, we drink Greek wine; reminds you of the old country."
W. O. Saunders
Statement by N. H. Polus,
Prop. The Central Cafe
Elizabeth City, N.C.
"We Greeks in America observe some of the holidays and customs of the old country, in a way. Our principal celebrations are Eastar and Christmas. Easter is our big celebration. In the old country the celebration begins with services in the Cathedral at 4 o'clock in the morning, sunrise. After that everybody makes fun; there are a lot of fireworks; everybody keeps open house; every Greek home is open on that day to everybodywho wants to walk in. We feast much; almost every home has its roast or bar-becued lamb, with salads, cheese, hard boiled eggs and native wine.
"I have tried to barbecue lamb as they do in the old country; but I make a mess of it. They rub a dressed kid or a lamb with garlic; put pepper and salt on it, first coating it with olive oil to make the pepper and salt stick. The lamb is then put on a spit several feet away from the fire and turned from time to time until done so tender the meat falls from the bones when removed from the spit to its pan. And all the time it is basted frequently with a sauce made of olive oil and lemon juice whipped together like mayonnaise and flavored with leaves of thyme. My wife tasted a kid barbecued that way when she visited the old country with me in 1937. She says it was the best meat she ever tasted. My wife, an American girl, didn't like garlic much when we were first married, but after that trip to the old country and eating food over there she's crazy about it.
W.O. Saunders
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH IN GASTON COUNTY
Adelphotis Arachoviton "Karyae"
( A Society of Greek- American Citizens from Arachova, Lakedemonos, Greece )
Copied from handbook of Gastonia and Gaston County by Joseph H. Speak, Gastonia, N. C., February 6, 1936
In the two Carolinas and surrounding southern states lives a large group of American citizens of Greek descent. Feeling lonely for oldcustoms and friends, a number of the leaders conceived the idea of organizing an association which would at once appeal to the spirit of need and want for periodic gatherings and effected the above organization in Sept., 1932. From the beginning it had a rapid growth, soon including members from many sections of the United States and Canada. In addition to its benevolent features, it has established an annual get-together meeting, which in the beginning lasted but one day. Beginning with the second year it was felt necessary to enlarge the annual program so as to include a two or three day period. The society early bought forty acres of very beautiful mountain land and valleys adjacent to Crowders Mountain, one of the highest peaks within miles of Gastonia, and there constructed a large pavilion, dining hall, kitchen and a group of cottages. During the second year of functioning, a splendid little chapel was built and is still maintained for religious service and worship.
Certain leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church of North and South America conceived an idea that the old Linwood College property would make an ideal location for a Greek college and induced the archbishop to visit this property with the result that the Archbishop Athenagoras made a personal inspection. Certain Greek leaders here, notably, Chris P. Leventis, P.P. Leventis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos and John Kiliveros met the archbishop on his arrival in Gastonia and piloted him and certain visiting ministers through the Linwood property, with the result that the archbishop became impressed with the possibilities offered. A meeting of certain city officials and representatives and religious and business leaders was held in the City Hall at which time the archbishop and visiting ministers were heartily welcomed to the city. On this occasion Mr. E. B. Denny and other officials made speeches of welcome. The archbishop was very generous in his response to the welcome extended. His speech was delivered in his nativelanguage but it was splendidly interpreted by Mr. Chris P. Leventis. Short conferences were held with the owners of the property, and very soon the property was bought for establishment thereon of an orphanage, old peoples' home, school for ministers of the Greek Orthodox Church, and a school for the teaching of the Greek language. It might be said that the citizens were much interested in the efforts of the Greek citizens, and particularly those who had large financial interest in the Linwood College property and they readily gave their approval of a price consideration which would bring into the ownership of the Greek Orthodox Church this very beautiful property. Two Greek citizens of Philadelphia, Mr. Constantine Stefano and his brother, made a very generous contribution of $12,500 for the purchase of the property, and on the passing of the deed, work was immediately begun on the renovation of certain buildings that could be used and the erection of others. These buildings were thoroughly equipped and furnished, water works and electricity being included in the furnishings, the grounds beautified and the president's home renovated, the idea being to make ready for the fall opening for at least one hundred children to be taken care of in the school. On Sept. 18, 1932, the Greek Monastery St. Stephanos was launched and dedicatory services held.
On this occasion the mayor of the city and other representatives took part in the formal dedication, and corner stone laying was in the hands of Archbishop Athenagoras of the Greek Orthodox Curch of North and South America, and certain ministers of the church. Representatives of the city had part in the program, as well also as certain city leaders.
An immense crowd attended this dedication, American citizens Of Greek descent and other friends coming from as far south as Texas and as far north as Pennsylvania and New York. Among those present and taking part in the program were the Stefano brothers of Philadelphia. The first President of the institution was Rev. Archmandrite Georasimos Elias and the first school Principal was Rev. Archmandrito Emil Pashalakis, and Rev. Joseph Pitsonis was the first supply officer.
The institution is the center of the religious activities of the members of the Greek Orthodox Church in the Carolinas with the exception of Charlotte, Winston, and Raleigh, N. C., and Charleston, S. C. It is the plan of the institution to erect its own chapel, but until this is done, the little chapel at Karyae Park is being used. This isa very beautiful little chapel and in it one finds a number of very beautiful icons of the Greek Orthodox Church dividing the Holy of Holies from the mani auditorium. There one also finds beautiful chandeliers and candle holders, a number of beautiful pictures and other symbolic furnishings.
Great interest has been shown from the beginning by the Greek citizens here and throughout the surrounding territory, but it would not be amiss to say that certain ones who have had a conspicious part in the gifts of time, energy, and money have been Messrs. Chris P. Leventis, P. P. Leventis, James P. Leventis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos, George Demetriades. Tom Stathakis, Nick Entas, and George and John Kiliveros. For a long period Mr. Andrew Trakas was on the building committee, Mr. P. P. Leventis served as Assistant Treasurer and Mr. Chris P. Leventis as Secretary.
The following is culled from an account of the dedication of St. Stephanos, September 18, 1939, appearing in the Gazette of September 19, 1939:
"This dedication marked the opening of the first national Greek college and orphanage in the United States. The throng was welcomed by Chris P. Leventis, prominent Gastonia Greek, who was in charge of the program. His words were supplemented by a brief address of welcome by W. Grady Gaston. Secretary of the Gastonia Chamber of Commerce; Dr. J. H. Henderlite, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church; and E. B. Denny, Mayor of the city of Gastonia.
"The dedication address, the principal feature of the program, was delivered by Archbishop Athenagoras, head of the Greek Orthodox Church in North and South America. The Archbishop, speaking in his native tongue, dedicated the new institution to the good of the oncoming generations of Greek-American youth, to the glory of God, and to the highest ideals of Greek and American citizenship.
"Chris Stepheno, seion of the Stephano family of Philadelphia, principal benafactor of the monastery, was presented to the audience and spoke briefly in acknowledgment of the introduction. Following the address of dedication, Archbishop Athenagoras conducted a colorful ceremony marking the laying of the corner stone of the monastery St. Stephanos Chapel to beerected near the Adminstration Building in the near future. He was assisted by Father Pashalakis, President of the monastery. At 6:30 o'clock in the evening, religious services were held at the Greek chapel in Karyae Park with Archbishop Athenagoras in charge."
GREEK ORTHODOX CHURCH IN GASTON COUNTY
Adelphotis Arachoviton "Karyae"
( A Society of Greek- American Citizens from Arachova, Lakedemonos, Greece )
Copied from handbook of Gastonia and Gaston County by Joseph H. Speak, Gastonia, N. C, February 6, 1936
In the two Carolinas and surrounding southern states lives a large group of American citizens of Greek descent. Feeling lonely for old customs and friends, a number of the leaders conceived the idea of organizing an association which would at once appeal to the spirit of need and want for periodic gatherings and effected the above organization in Sept., 1932. From the beginning it had a rapid growth, soon including members from many sections of the United States and Canada. In addition to its benevolent features, it has established an annual get-together meeting, which in the beginning lasted but one day. Beginning with the second year it was felt necessary to enlarge the annual program so as to include a two or three day period. The society early bought forty acres of very beautiful mountain land and valleys adjacent to Crowders Mountain, one of the highest peaks within miles of Gastonia, and there constructed a large pavilion, dining hall, kitchen and agroup of cottages. During the second year of functioning, a splendid little chapel was built and is still maintained for religious service and worship.
Certain leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church of North and South America conceived an Idea that the old Linwood College property would make an ideal location for a Greek college and induced the archbishop to visit this property with the result that the Archbishop Athenagoras made a personal inspection. Certain Greek leaders here, notably, Chris P. Leventis, P.P. Leventis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos and John Kiliveros met the archbishop on his arrival in Gastonia and piloted him and certain visiting ministers through the Linwood property, with the resultthat the archbishop became impressed with the possibilities offered. A meeting of certain city officials and representatives and religious and business leaders was held in the City Hall at which time the archbishop and visiting ministers were heartily welcomed to the city. On this occasion Mr. E. B. Denny and other officials made speeches of welcome. The archbishop was very generous in his response to the welcome extended. His speech was delivered in his native language but it was splendidly interpreted by Mr. Chris P. Leventis. Short conferences were held withthe owners of the property, and very soon the property was bought for establishment thereon of an orphanage, old peoples' home, school for ministers of the Greek Orthodox Church, and a school for the teaching of the Greek language. It might be said that the citizens were much interested in the efforts of the Greek citizens, and particularly those who had large financial interest in the Linwood College property and they readily pave their approval of a price consideration which would bring into the ownership of the Greek Orthodox Church this very beautiful property. Two Greek citizens of Philadelphia, Mr. Constantine Stefano and his brother, made a very generous contribution of $12,500 for the purchase of the property, and on the passing of the deed, work was immediately begun on the renovation of certain buildings that could be used and the erection of others. These buildings were thoroughly equipped and furnished, water works and electricity being included in the furnishings, the grounds beautified and the president's home renovated, the idea being to make ready for the fall opening for at least one hundred children to be taken care of in the school. On Sept. 18, 1932, the Greek Monastery St. Stephanos was launched and dedicatory services held.
On this occasion the mayor of the city and other representatives took part in the formal dedication, and corner stone laying was in the hands of Archbishop Athenagoras of the Greek Orthodox Curch of North and South America, and certain ministers of the church. Representatives of the city had part in the program, as well also as certain city leaders. An immense crowd attended this dedication, American citizens Of Greek descent and other friends coming from as far south as Texas and as far north as Pennsylvania and New York. Among those present and taking part in the program were the Stefano brothers of Philadelphia. The first President of the institution was Rev. Archmandrite Gerasimos Elias and the first school Principal was Rev. Archmandrite Emil Pashalakis, and Rev. Joseph Pitsonis was the first supply officer.
The institution is the center of the religious activities of the members of the Greek Orthodox Church in the Carolinas with the exception of Charlotte, Winston, and Raleigh, N. C., and Charleston, S. C. It is the plan of the institution to erect its own chapel, but until this is done, the little chapel at Karyae Park is being used. This is a very beautiful little chapel and in it one finds a number of very beautiful icons of the Greek Orthodox Church dividing the Holy of Holies from the mani auditorium.
There one also finds beautiful chandeliers and candle holders, a number of beautiful pictures and other symbolic furnishings. Great interest has been shown from the beginning by the Greek citizens here and throughout the surrounding territory, but it would not be amiss to say that certain ones who have had aconspicious part in the gifts of time, energy, and money have been Messrs. Chris P. Leventis, P. P. Leventis, James P. Levantis, Andrew Trakas, John Petcheos, George Demetriades. Tom Stathakis, Nick Entas, and George and John Kiliveros. For a long period Mr. Andrew Trakas was on the building committee, Mr. P. P. Levantis served as Assistant Treasurer and Mr. Chris P. Leventis as Secretary.
The following is culled from an account of the dedication or St. Stephanos, September 18, 1939, appearing in the Gazette of September 19, 1939:
"This dedication marked the opening of the first national Greek college and orphanage in the United States. The throng was welcomed by Chris P. Leventis, prominent Gastonia Greek, who was in charge of the program. His words were supplemented by a brief address of welcome by W. Grady Gaston. Secretary of the Gastonia Chamber of Commerce; Dr. J. H. Henderlite, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church; and E. B. Denny, Mayor of the city of Gastonia.
"The dedication address, the principal feature of the program, was delivered by Archbishop Athenagoras, head of the Greek orthodox church in North and South America. The Archbishop, speaking in his native tongue, dedicated the new institution to thegood of the oncominggenerations of Greek-American youth, to the glory of God, and to thehighest ideals of Greek and American citizenship.
"Chris Stephano, scion of the Stephano family of Philadelphia, principal benefactor of themonastery, was presented to the audience and spoke briefly in acknowledgement of the introduction. Following the address of dedication, Archbishop Athenagores conducted a colorful ceremony marking the laying of the corner stone of themonastery St. Stephanos Chapel to be erected near the Adminstration Building in the near future. Hewas assisted by Father Pashalakis, President of the monastery. At 6:30 o'clock in the evening, religious services were held at the Greek chapel in Karyae Park with Archbishop Athenagoras in charge."
