Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
FAIRFIELD COUNTY
THOMAS C. CAMAK (white)
83 YEARS OLD.
Thomas C. Camak, widely known as a contributor of news items to the Fairfield News and Herald of Winnsboro, S. C., lives in a two-story frame house on his plantation twelve miles south of Winnsboro, S. C. His daughter-in-law, Mrs. T. C. Camak, Jr., and her two children live in the home with him and his wife. At the advanced age of 83, he is still active and a member of the County Equalization Board of Property, in Fairfield County.
"I am up here this morning attending, with a few other feeble-minded men, a meeting of the Fairfield County Board of Equalization. It's a curious thing the way people return property for taxation. For instance, two highly respected citizens live on adjoining lands that produce about the same crops per acre. One will return his property in value at seven dollars per acre, his house at five hundred dollars, making mention of two out houses at one hundred dollars each, four mules at fifty dollars each, etc. The other citizen will return his lands at three hundred dollars per acre, his residence at two hundred dollars, making no mention of outhouses, and return his mules at twenty-five dollars a head. It's strange the first man doesn't take exception to the prejudicial return of his neighbor, but he never does. The only fair way, it seems to me, is to have property returned at its full and just valuation.
"Again it is strange that all the boards I serve on are alive with interest in seeing that the real property of railroad, factories, and other corporations are assessed pretty high in order to bring in sufficient revenue to run our schools and pay the bulk of the cost of our expensive county government systems.
"I was born about ten miles east of Winnsboro in the Lebannon section of the county, just after a red rooster crowed three times in the nighttime, on May 11, 1855. It is reported that I came here into this world squalling and demanding nourishment and the favor of the superfine sex. In my old age, I have changed very little about the nourishment and the favor of the women of my household.
"My father was David Y. Camak; my mother, Jane Robinson Camak, Scotch-Irish on both sides of the parental house. My ancestors came from Ireland to this county, about the year 1765, and settled on Crooked Run Creek in Fairfield District, Craven District then.
"The first school I attended? Let me see! I walked four miles to a one-teacher school; first, to a Miss Helen Puit and then to a Mrs. S. B. Simmons, who taught in the same school. The building was known as the Cornwallis House, from the fact that Lord Cornwallis spent a day and a night there during the Revolutionary War. Is it still standing? No, the Yankees burned it, but on it now stands the parsonage of Bethel Methodist Episcopal Church in the Greenbrier section. It was a tuition school. My father paid ten cents a day for my schooling then. I attended five days a week, and I stayed all day. For my dinner, I carried a bottle of molasses, two buttered biscuits, and one biscuit with a streak of lean and a streak of fat bacon between it. We began in the old blue-back speller. As we progressed, we got into Robert son's arithmetic and used slates and slated pencils. I forget sang it to the tune of Old Dan Tucker. The whole school enjoyed this method of learning geography. All the boys and girls who went to this school with me are dead and zone. The last one to depart was Thomas Woodward Ruff. I can't remember how many boys there were, but I remember counting the girls every night after I went to bed. The number was exactly twenty-two. There was only one other boy, besides myself, that was big enough to court them, and me sure did our best. The influence of these girls, which was good, made me study hard at night and slick up my hair a little before going to school in the morning. I pause here, like Brutus in his address to the Romans, to ask you if you think the large school plants with the excellent equipment of today are turning out as worthy products as the old field of the sixties and seventies?
"What about the period of great hostilities between the North and South? Looking over church statistics, it is shameful that secession and war ever came about. Here was a young nation, not as old as I am today, founded on the principles of Jesus, patience, forbearance, long suffering, liberty, tolerance, and a declaration that all men are born free and equal. Why could not the sermon on the mount have been heeded? That would have provided for just recognition of what the South had done for the Negro race, a time to be set for their emancipation, and compensation to the individual slave owner for the property valuation of the slave. The Christian citizenship of our country lost a great opportunity when it did not stand between the Pharisaical traders and manufacturers of the North and the arrogant and proud land owners and slaveholders of the South and settle the question without bloodshed and on some social and economic policy fair to the Negro and not injurious to the southern white people.
"Well, at the end of the war, Sherman's army came thru our section raiding and burning. When they got to our house, they herded up all cows and sheep, put halters on the mules we had, made the Negroes catch our chickens - all except an old red rooster that got away under the barn - ransacked the smokehouse and, for pure meanness, emptied a tub of lye soap into our molasses hogshead. After they left us and marched on to Winnsboro, it was a long time before we saw an egg again and the old red rooster was very lonely; in fact, he didn't strut any more.
"We didn't have any coffee for a long time after the war. We used as a substitute, that winter, parched ground rye; in the fall, ground okra seed. Mother made our clothes; spun the thread on the old spinning wheel after the cotton had been carded into bats by the Negro women on the place. She could weave the cloth necessary to clothe the family. We took strips of bark from live walnut trees to dye the cloth.
"Yes, I remember the old wire hoop she wore to bulge out the skirt. Later, the hoop was discarded and bustles became the rage and fashion. This looked like a head rest, but was tied on too far down the back to do the woman's head any good, I think.
"One of the great diversions in my young manhood was horseback riding with girls. You couldn't carry the getting-up, mount block along with you into the woods, when you were in quest of wild strawberries, whortle berries or wild flowers; so, when the quest was over, the great problem was not one of depression but one of elevation of the girl to her seat upon the horse. It never happened to me, off course, but sometimes a nervous boy would find difficulty im finding the proper foot of the young lady in the labyrinth of furbelows, petticoats, balmorals and riding skirts. Then he must have a good play of the wrist muscles to allow for any eccentricity of <text not clear> ankle; for it night turn under excitement of the movement, slip out of the boy's hand, and by force of gravity descend to the ground. Now there is a law in physics that when a downward pressure of this kind is removed and the upward pressure is not instantly withdrawn, the resultant effect might be one of personal confusion and embarrassment.
"Yes, I recall the corset. The smaller a woman's waist, in those days, the more attractive she was. It ought to have been condemned and outlawed. I have often seen a girl or woman faint at a dance or picnic; due, in my judgment, to tight lacing.
"How about the Sabbath day observance now and in my young days? Well, I was brought up a strict Sabbatarian. We got up, went to family prayers in the dining room, ate breakfast without the usual levity and talk about personal affairs, had our boots and shoes blacked, dressed, and the whole family attended church. Nothing but sacred music was played or sung in the house that day, not even our favorites.
"While I like baseball, I shudder every time I read of a game being played on Sunday, Visualizing the gate money, betting, coca-cola stands, peanut venders, loud speakers, and so forth.
"I told my wife, who is just 80 years old, that if she ever played golf with Miss Hemphill and expected me to witness her triumph, she must pull it off some other day Besides Sunday.
"Woman suffrage? I thought once that was the panacea for all our ills and woes, but, alas, I see very little change, except the women have become a little more masculine and the men a little lazier. Some of the byproducts are high school girls smoking cigarets on school busses, and Mrs. Smith attending a rally at the Jefferson Hotel, which required Mr. Smith (I suppose) to remain at home and attend to the baby.
"In some homes in those good old days, we were allowed to dance the quadrille and the Virginia reel, but in most homes, under the saintly power of the preacher, it was prohibited. There was no round dancing in our section in my youth. Indeed, we boys were so unsophisticated, in our neck of the woods, had one of us got his arms around one of the twenty-two girls I spoke of, he would have stalled like a mule or carried her bodily to the Methodist parsonage and got married through shame and remorse.
"What did we do for entertainment at the other houses where dancing was forbidden? O, we played 'Thimble,' told fortunes, played 'Old Maid,' 'Little Sallie Walker,' and 'Heavy, Heavy, Hangs Over Head.'
"I know very little about the military government in South Carolina. And I have no knowledge of the Ku Klux Klan. When I became a man, I put away childish things, joined the Greenbriar Club, in 1876, wore the red shirt of those days, and obeyed the orders of Major Woodward, the leader. Where he got them we never know nor asked any questions, but the Major presented the club, in July 1876, with three hundred muskets and plenty of ammunition to fire them. Each member took a musket and some powder and balls and a box of caps home with him.
"One night I was at the Methodist parsonage when a courier, Tom Smith, came and notified me to come with my shooting iron to McKinstry's Hill, where the Greenbriar Club was to be assembled. I got my horse and musket and met them. We were led to a schoolhouse by Major Woodward. When we arrived, it was estimated that there were 5,000 Negroes outside and inside the schoolhouse. A bright mulatto from Connecticut, I. B. Smith, was speaking. Major Woodward pushed thru the crowd into the Schoolhouse and I squeezed in behind him. Some discourteous reference to the Major was made by the speaker. The Major advanced and knocked Smith down and broke up the meeting.
"That winter our Greenbriar Club went to Columbia. Fairfield had two Negro members in the Republican Mackey House of Representatives, John Gibson and Dan Byrd. John Gibson lived ten miles from Winnsboro; Dan Byrd in my section, Mossy Dale. We got John and Dan to leave the Mackey House and come over to the Wallace House of Representatives. We contributed that much to the strengthening of the Wallace House and to the undermining of the Mackey House.
"Dan lived to an old age and was a privileged character among the white people of Fairfield. After John's term expired in the legislature, he opened up a shoe repair shop in Columbia, S. C., where he enjoyed a large patronage from white people who knew his history."
Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
NINA RABB CASTLES (WHITE)
80 YEARS OLD.
Mrs. Nina R. Castles, widow of the late Warren P. Castles, lives with her daughter, Janie, on the southwest corner of Liberty and Crawford Streets, in the town of Winnsboro, Fairfield County, South Carolina. In comparison with resident and property owners in the locality, she is wealthy and well connected socially.
"I am here all alone, with the exception of my cook in the kitchen, so I will just make home folks of you and ask you into the dining room where there is a fire. Take a chair near the table and use it as your writing desk. Put yourself at ease and let me know what will interest you. I received your phone call and am only partially enlightened as to the object of your proposed interview.
"I was born February 5th, 1858, on my father's plantation about six miles west of Winnsboro. My father was John Glazier Rabb, and my mother was Nancy Kincaid Rabb. Father died in 1872; mother in 1900. They are both buried in the graveyard of the old historic 'Brick Church' on the banks of Little River in this county.
"My father and mother had a large family of children. I'll try to tell you a little about each one. John, the eldest, never married. He was killed in the great War of Secession while carrying the flag of the 6th Regiment at the battle of Gaines Mill, Virginia, June 30, 1862. In carrying the colors on this occasion, General Bratton afterward said of him. 'He advanced onward and onward with a stride unnaturally steady. None who saw it can ever forget the splendid picture presented by that glorious and handsome boy, John Rabb, on that occasion. Our line poured on behind him, wave over wave, through obstructions, and, coming up to the colors in his steady hand, we continued the advance until we had swept over the enemy's line of battle.' My brother, Horace, carries the gold watch that John carried the day that he was killed.
"James Kincaid Rabb, the next boy, was wounded at Petersburg, Virginia, but he lived through the war, married, and reared a family. He died June 5, 1908, and was buried with Confederate honors at Seattle, Washington. William Clarence Rabb was in the 2d. Regiment, but he lived on till August, 1929. Virginia Rabb died at the age of ten years. Edwin Belzer died at the age of eight. Jessie May Rabb married Rev. W. H. Millen, D. D., and had three children. She died in Rosemark, Tenn. Horace Rabb married Mary Walker. He is a retired A.R.P. preacher living at Due West, S. C. He is the source of much of the information I am giving you this morning. He is three years older than I. I. Nina, am the eighth child. Charley K. Rabb born 1860 married Elizabeth Province, daughter of Col. David Province. An infant born July 16, 1864, died a few months before Sherman raided our home.
"My father was fifty-two years old and I was about seven when the Yankees came through our section of the county. He was a successful farmer and slaveholder, and had stored up large quantities of cotton, meat, corn, molasses, wheat, oats, and other farm produce on the plantation. He had at this time eight mules, five mares, a herd of cows, droves of hogs, and flocks of sheep, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, peafowls, and chickens. Yet, when the armies and camp followers of Sherman passed through, not one of all these,- think of it - not one of all these were left on the place! I remember an old bob-tailed horse, a superannuated carriage horse returned three days after the Yankees left. How glad the slaves and I were to see old Bob? Old Bob, however, was passed his working days. The Yankees found it out and he was not wanted by them; so they turned him loose to wander back home. They didn't leave one pound of meat, meal, flour, nor molasses, except a small amount that had been buried in a box I a hole in the slave graveyard on the farm.
"The house furnishings were destroyed or taken away, and the only bed-clothes saved were those on mine and Charley's beds; we were, supposedly, sick with measles. The members of the family were not left a change of clothing. The gin-house and twenty-five bales of cotton were burned in my father's sight. The large barn and a log house on the opposite side of the farm escaped destruction. Army wagons had hauled corn from them. Perhaps other wagons expected to come and carry off the reminder and then set the buildings afire, but none returned. From the remainder of that corn, my father supplied many neighbors. Since the gristmills had been destroyed and no meal could be ground, our family and others subsisted on lye hominy for a long time.
"In spite of all this ill treatment, my mother kept her poise and peace of heart in the deep resources of her faith in God and the Christian religion. She said, 'In spite of it all, we are not to cherish ill feelings toward the people of the North.' And I can truthfully say that I have lived to make many dear friends of families whose forebears fought that the Union might be preserved.
"My mother was a woman of energy and good judgment. She was a skilled weaver and seamstress. During the war, she operated and directed a member of sewing machines, which turned out many yards of cloth that were sewed into garments. She often worked a loom with her hands and feet. When jute bagging became scarce, she conceived the idea of making bagging from the inner bark of the poplar trees. Water was dammed up on a branch, and long green poplar poles were out and submerged into the water until the bark could be easily removed. The inner bark was then peeled off and wound into balls, from which shuttles were filled. Hundreds of yards of bagging were thus secured to wrap the lint cotton into bales.
"Mother also engaged in the silk industry. She raised silk worms and obtained silk from their cocoons. My brother and I had the task of gathering mulberry leaves in the woods for these worms. I can see my mother now, in my mind, with cocoons in a vessel of tepid water slowly winding off the silk. From the silk thus obtained, she made silk mitts.
"Our slave quarters were in sight of our residence. They were arranged in two rows of houses, with a well kept street or wagon path between the two rows. They were frame buildings with rock chimneys, and they had blinds to close the apertures or windows. The carpenters made each household of slaves sufficient and efficient bedsteads. The bedding was made of wheat straw and the pillows of cotton. Cotton quilts were used on the beds in summer and coarse wool blankets in winter. We fed the slaves well, and a spirit of affectionate care existed upon the part of the owners for the slaves, and a spirit of respect and faithful service prevailed on the part of the slaves towards the occupants of 'the big house.' Our slaves had the same physician our family had, and they received attentive nursing. Doses of medicine were accurately measured and duly administered to them. Prayers were conducted among them, and the older ones were taken to church on the Sabbath.
"I had a governess in our home, a Miss Harriett Betreville from Charleston, who taught me in my girlhood. She was in the home when the Yankees came to the house. Our hams had been salted and smoked in the dirt smokehouse that prevailed in slavery time on all plantations of any size. We had taken fifty hams and suspended them in the attic of our home. They soon ferreted them out. The Yankees came in squads and would go up and come down with them in the transportation. As the last ham was thus being carried out, Miss Betreville, with an old maid's sternness and precision, seized the ham that was in the hands of the soldier and said <text not clear>oudly, 'You shall not have the last one.' The soldier hesitated and then laughingly relinquished it to her hands.
"You asked about the dress style in those days and how much material was used in a single dress? I think it was from fourteen to sixteen yards, depending somewhat upon the pattern of the dress and the size of the lady. Yes, we wore wire hoops. They were slipped over the head and the petticoats and dress came on afterward. When a lady sat down, she was careful to arrange her skirts and press both hands down on the front of the hoop to prevent the untoward results of its flying upward and carrying the skirts along with it. Well, it looked mighty pretty while standing and walking, but it took some education, refinement, and experience to get away with the made in a crowded reception room. One never wore them while horseback riding. The long riding skirt was the vogue for equestrians.
"I wonder what has become of the old Barthrop sewing machine? This was a pedal sewing machine antedating the Wheeler and Wilson. It was larger and was boxed. It had folding doors to the inside mechanism.
"How did the term 'smokehouse' originate? This was the meat house. It had a dirt floor. The meat was suspended from cross pieces arranged therein. Fires were built on the dirt floor under the hanging sides, shoulders, and hams of meat, and in that way the meat was smoked and cured. The house derived its name from the method of smoking and curing the meat. During and after the war, salt became so source and valuable that the dirt floors were scraped and the soil boiled, and in this way, salt seasoning in small quantities was obtained for use.
"There were quilting parties, sewing bees, and candy pulls among us during the war. In 1872, our family moved to Due West, S. C., and one month afterward, Feb. 20, 1872, my father, John Glasier Rabb, died. We came back to Winnsboro, to live on the old plantation, and my mother died there, April 11, 1900. Both are buried in the Old Brick Church graveyard, on Little River.
"I married Warren Preston Castles in 1892. We have been blessed with three children. Glazier, lives at Great Falls, S. C. Nancy married Herbert Young and lives at Kershaw, S. C. Janie is not married; she lives with me and teaches school on the border line of Fairfield and Richland Counties. We still own the old home in the country, and we try to keep it up. We own and live in this town residence.
"You must call again and bring some of your friends and have some music on that sweet-toned old piano over there. I have a radio but it is not altogether what I long for. I want company - young people - girls who can play and men and boys who can sing the old songs like 'Silver Threads Among the Gold,' 'In the Gloaming,' and 'Juanita,' and some comic ones like 'Cushion Bend' and 'Susan Jane.' I find myself at times wishing to hear the old songs rather than the new ones on the radio. Bring some young people to see me."
FAIRFIELD COUNTY THOMAS M. CATHCART (white)
80 YEARS OLD.
Thomas Madden Cathcart is a lawyer and a magistrate. He resides alone in a two-story frame house on North Vanderhorst Street in the town of Winnsboro. He has been the magistrate of this district for fifty-six years, being appointed for the first time in 1882. He is well posted in the law, both civil and criminal. In spite of his age, he never has opposition in the democratic primaries, which is decisive for all elective offices now in South Carolina. His rulings and decisions are sound. In fact, he has not been reversed on appeal to the Circuit Court since the case of Johnson against the Southern Railway Company in 1906.
The old lawyer has some eccentricities when it comes to his personal appearance. His gray hair is worn long about his shoulders. He grows a mustache but is otherwise clean shaven. He was wearing at this interview (May 24, 1938) the same celluloid collar and the same black cravat that he wore in 1904.
"I was the oldest child of our family. My father was an immigrant from northern Ireland, coming to this country about 1827. His name was John M. Cathcart. He began farming six miles of Winnsboro, and was very successful. He married Nancy Madden, sister of Dr. T. B. Madden, for whom I was named. Do you remember Tom Madden who was for many years postmaster at Columbia? Well, he was my first cousin. The other children in the family were Belle and Mary, my sisters, and one brother, William M. Cathcart, who died in this house last winter. My sisters were educated at Due West, the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Collage for girls. Both became teachers. I am the only survivor of the family. I have never married. I commenced school at Mt. Zion Institute in 1864, then taught by Prof. Adolphus Woodward and Prof. Farrar. I began in Webster's blue-back speller. The school was one of the best in the upper part of the State. The pupils idolized Prof. Woodward. After leaving here, he went to Selma, Alabama, and was head of the school in that city. Prof. Farrar was the assistant; I forget his initials, but he made a military company of the larger boys in attendance.
"Yes, I recollect seeing the Yankees in Winnsboro. They ransacked most of the houses, in search of money, jewelry, silverware, and portable articles of value. Afterward, they set fire to houses of the most prominent people, and committed sacrilege in burning St. John's Episcopal Church on Sunday. They laughingly said they did so because many of the members had the family name, Davis, spelled the same as President Jefferson Davis of the Confederate States.
"After the war, my father engaged in the mercantile business in Winnsboro, and prospered greatly. I left him in January, 1876 and ran off to Randolph County, Illinois. It was a prairie section of country then. The little town or village where I received my mail was named Sparta.
"One day I opened a democratic newspaper, published in Indianapolis, Indiana, and read these headlines; 'Behold! Hampton is inaugurated Governor of South Carolina. Behold Old Confederates! The Radicals sit solitary. They have become as widows. Their filthiness is their skirts. Their garments are stained with the gore of shame and dishonor.' It gave me a longing for home, and I came back to Winnsboro. I began the study of law under Col. James H. Rion, and was admitted to the bar on examination by the Supreme Court of South Carolina. When I was appointed Trial Justice, Jno. J. Neil was also a Trial Justice here. Our jurisdiction covered the entire territory of the county. We received no salary, and we were paid according to a fee bill enacted by the Radical Legislature. It was a very lucrative position under the fee bill. Now my salary is $200.00 per annum, plus costs in civil cases.
"When the Yankees came through, the Confederate money was much depreciated, but the individual Yankees would exchange powder for it. I remember Mr. John Smith bought some powder for hunting purposes. It was a small amount, but he gave a Yankee ten dollars for it. I remember another incident. Two of General Johnston's Confederate soldiers, in returning to Tennessee, wanted to cross a ferry. They had a quantity of tobacco and some Confederate money. It was left optional with them whether they would pay in money or so much tobacco. One elected to pay in money; the other paid in tobacco.
"Between 1876 and 1900, there were some thickly settled portions of Fairfield County. Most of the inhabitants were white people who owned small farms. Oakland had a democratic club of 360 white men; Greenbriar, 400; and Feasterville 375. Now all white people of means and wealth have moved into Winnsboro, and those who were poor and in bad circumstances went to the cotton mills. The country population now is about seventy-five percent Negro race.
"Horse racing and cock fighting have given place to moving pictures, baseball, pool, and punch boards. Draw poker has been changed to stud, and high die to craps. At one time we had seven barrooms in Winnsboro that kept open day and night. There was generally a back room in which cards were played and drinks were served. A country store could secure a county license to sell not less than a quart of liquor. Winnsboro went prohibition once. It lasted just twelve months, and whiskey was restored by a great majority at the election box. Instead of seven barrooms, there were as many or more places that sold liquor.
"When Hampton was elected, the Democratic Party felt under political obligations to Republican Judge T. J. Mackay for his change of party affiliation during the election campaign of 1876. The Legislature of South Carolina re-elected him Judge of the circuit in which he lived. He was an entertainer on the hustings, in conventions, and, in fact, whenever and wherever called upon. His wit and humor did not depart from him in the exercise of his judicial capacity. One of his nephews, Arthur W. Mackey, was a practicing attorney at the Winnsboro bar. Chalmers Gaston, father of the present Judge Arthur Gaston of Chester, was solicitor of the circuit. A homicide case was carried before Judge Mackey, who was holding court in Columbia, Richland County, which was out of the judicial district. The Solicitor, Mr. Gaston, made the point that Judge Mackey being out of his circuit had no right to hear the habeas corpus proceedings in Columbia. Mackey went ahead and heard the case, fixed the bond of the defendant, and said this to the defendant's attorney: 'Mr. Solicitor and Gentlemen of the counsel for the prisoner. It happens that I am going to my home in Chester oh the first train this afternoon. You will prepare an order granting the writ and fixing the bond at $3,000. (I think that was the amount.) We will all take the train together. When the headlight of the engine strikes Fairfield County, get your pen and ink ready. When the tail end of the coach we are riding in passes over the demarcation of Richland and Fairfield Counties, you will present the papers to me, along with the pen freshly inked, and I will sign them. Mr. Gaston, we would like to have your company on this trip.' Mr. Gaston could not constrain his admiration and laughter, end he withdrew his objections to the jurisdiction.
"The greatest personal force in politics since Hampton, in South Carolina, was the force exercised by B. R. Tillman, who wrested the political control of the State from the hands of old time, aristocratic families and put it into the hands of the farmers and poor whites. This Tillman movement, as it was called, divided the white people into two camps, Tillmanites and anti-Tillmanites. The bitterness between the two parties was greater in Fairfield, in 1893, than in any other part of the State, owing to the fact that General John Bratton of Fairfield County was one of his opponents for governor in 1890. Fights, quarrels, and dissensions occurred among members of the same families. Its influence pervaded the court proceedings and affected the selection of petit juries and the complexion of their verdicts. For instance, there was a murder case tried here, an interacting one, reported in 40 S. C. Reports (Shand) on page 363, 'The State vs. Atkinson.' The indictment charged Jasper Atkinson as principal and John Atkinson as accessory before the fact for the murder of John Clamp. The two Atkinson's were then staying in the home of the deceased Clamp, who was shot and instantly killed one night as he was returning home from Ridgeway. His killing took place January 28, 1893. The case came up for trial at the February term of court, 1893, before Judge Wallace and a jury. The evidence was entirely circumstantial, and the links in the chain were: John Atkinson was a day laborer on the farm far Mr. Clamp. He loved Mrs. Clamp, not wisely but too well. She became infatuated with John, without the unsuspecting husband's knowledge. Jasper appears on extended visit to John Atkinson. Jasper was John Atkinson's uncle. He was small, weak of will, and under the domination of John Atkinson's stronger will. Neither John nor Jasper Atkinson owned a shotgun. Clamp was killed by a wound in the head, made by buckshot. Mr. Clamp kept a shotgun in his house, but he used birdshot. The anxiety of the widow in employing counsel, J. E. McDonald, to look after his interest in the case caused comment. John and Jasper Atkinson were arrested and placed in jail. While making the arrest the officers of the law burst John Atkinson's trunk open and brought all his papers to the courthouse at Winnsboro. Clamp's shotgun was a muzzle leader. At the scene of the murder, they found pieces of scorched paper wadding, with which the killer had packed the powder and the shot down the muzzle of the gun. These bits of paper fitted into copy of the Fairfield News a Herald found in John Atkinson's trunk. On the chain of circumstantial evidence, the jury found both defendants, 'Guilty with recommendation to the mercy of the court.'
"An appeal was taken to the State Supreme Court, but the appeal was dismissed. Chief Justice McIver overruled all the exceptions and remanded the case to the lower court to set a new day for the execution.
"In all the history of criminal cases, these two men are the only ones who suffered the extreme penalty of death where the verdict was, 'Guilty with recommendation to the mercy of the court.' Every governor from Rutledge to Tillman recognized the recommendation as a case of commuting the death sentence to one of life imprisonment. The Tillmanites made a minor political issue out of it in the primaries of 1894. Tillman was still governor, but was making his campaign for U. S. Senator. He ignored the hoary precedent, he said, in favor of enlightenment and justice denied the application for executive clemency, and the Atkinsons were hanged publicly in the courthouse yard that summer before the primary election.
Strange to say, that fall (1894) a Tillmanite Legislature passed the following act:
CODE OF 1932, Sect. 1102.
Whoever is guilty of murder shall suffer the punishment of death: PROVIDED, However, That in each case where the prisoner is found guilty of murder, the jury may find a special verdict recommending him or her to the mercy of the court, whereupon the punishment shall be reduced to imprisonment in the penitentiary with hard labor during the whole lifetime of the prisoner. Act of 1894.
"Now it is mandatory on the Circuit Judge presiding to give heed to such words on an indictment, and to send such prisoners to the penitentiary for life."
FAIRFIELD COUNTY
CYNTHIA M. COLEMAN (white)
RIDGEWAY, S. C. 91 YEARS
Mrs. Cynthia Miller Coleman lives with her daughter, Sarah Starnes, who is postmistress in the town of Ridgeway, S. C. She is, for one of her age, active, intelligent, and responsive to all inquiries about her life for the past eighty-five years.
"My father's people, the Millers, and my mother's people, the White's were of Scotch-Irish descent. They came as settlers from Pennsylvania before the Revolutionary War. My father was Robert LeRoy Miller; my mother, Jane White Miller. In religion, my mother and father were strict-laced, blue-stockinged Presbyterians. I was born on their small plantation on Rocky Creek, Chester County, January 17, 1847.
"I learned to spell and read at home out of the blue-backed speller. It was a great text book for beginners. The first school I attended with other pupils was in 1855. Our teacher was a kind man, Mr. John Chisolm. The schoolhouse was the old Covenanter brick church. We had a long school day. We commenced early in the morning and ended just before sundown. We had an hour's intermission for dinner and recreation. The boys played town ball and shot marbles, and the few girls in the school looked on, enjoyed, and applauded the fine plays. Every Friday we had compositions and declamations from the pupils.
"Social amusements in the community consisted of pound parties at some neighbor's home during the winter nights, usually on Friday night. The music was made by a Negro fiddler, Tom Archer. We danced the cotillion, the Virginia reel, and steal partners. Our community would not tolerate waltzes and round dancing of any kind.
"I remember the hoop skirt. I wore one. I put it on over my head, tied it behind, then put on mu corset above this and laced it tight. My outside skirt came over the wire hoop and my bodice came down over the corset and fastened with a collar about my heck.
"Horseback riding was a great diversion for the girls of our day. We had long riding skirts and sidesaddles; also a hitching post and a get on block at the front gate to assist us in mounting on the horse.
"On the first Saturday in May, there was an annual picnic at Catawba Falls, now called Great Falls. The Catawba River at this point was full of shad every year at this time. After enjoying the picnic dinner and the day, we would return home with the back of the buggy or wagon body full of shed, which lasted the family and all the Negroes on the plantation through Sunday.
"My parents were not rich planters and slave owners. We only had six hundred acres of land and about thirty slaves. I don't remember ever seeing one of the slaves whipped. My mother taught them the Presbyterian catechism, where was printed especially for slaves. They were distributed among slave owners in 1840, my mother told me.
"In 1870 I married Walter Francis Marion Coleman, a boy in the neighborhood that I grew up with end loved all my life. The greatest grief of my life was when old A. S. Wallace, Scalawag Congressman, sent troops to the neighborhood to catch him for being a Ku Klux, but he evaded them by escaping to Texas for a time. When he returned, we moved out to Blackstock and lived there until my husband's death.
"Just before the coming of baseball, the annual event at Blackstock was the horseback tournament, with lances, and the crowning of a Queen of Love and Beauty and her two maids of honor. There were three posts erected on a field in a straight line and from there posts were suspended rings on a cross piece. Each rider was costumed as some knight. At a fast gallop they would successively race down the field and strive to gain each ring suspended. Each knight made the attempt there times. The maximum of rings caught on his lance could be nine rings. The one taking the greatest number of rings would have the honor and right to name and crown the Queen of Love and Beauty of the tournament. As each knight would take his place at the standing point, the announcer would proclaim the name of the rider. I remember some of the representations: Knight of Avenel, James Fitz James, Knight of Snowden, Knight of the Leapard, and Knight of Ravenswood. The others I can't recall. It was an exciting, thrilling scene of color, and the plaudit of the populace was deafening if the ring was successively taken by the knight and ran down his lance. I remember Mary Wylie was crowned at one time, Lydia Mobley at mother, and my husband's sister, Minnie Coleman once.
"In the little village of Blackstock, at that time about one hundred inhabitants, there were six barrooms, one church, and two policemen. Everybody was poor, everybody had credit, everybody played cards, (I mean the men), and everybody was happy.
"Matches were a luxury. Fire was covered with ashes over night to save one match. The price of them was twenty-five cents per hundred. Soap was made of ashes and hog grease.
"I have been the mother of eleven children, six of whom are living; the grandmother of twelve children, all living; and the great-grandmother of four children, all living. The Yankees didn't reach us in the route through this part of the State.
"One of my grandsons is a graduate of West Point Military Academy. He is a captain in the cavalry stationed at Fort Oglethorpe. His name is Capt. Logan Carroll Berry. He is a son of my daughter, Julia, with whom you danced fifty years ago. She is out on the porch now waiting to speak to you."
ELIZABETH VANDERVILIE DARBY (white)
84 YEARS OLD.
Elizabeth V. Darby lives with her half sister, Mrs. Edward D. Sloan, and her niece, Margaret Sloan, on the southwest corner of Vanderhorst and Moultrie Streets, in the town of Winnsboro, Fairfield County, South Carolina. She is vivacious, intelligent, a good talker, and an attentive listener. She is one of the interesting personalities of Winnsboro.
"It is quite a pleasure to see you again. I have been longing to see you and ask you about the particulars of the death of my friend, Bill Ellison. His death was so sudden. He was on the streets Saturday, cheerful and full of life, and early Sunday morning the news came that the silent angel of death had visited him and taken him away in a moment. And here I am old enough to be his mother and still living.
"How old am I? If I live to see the 24th of next September, I will be eighty-four years old. I was born fourteen miles from Wilmington, N. C., at Long Creek, a small post office place, in New Hanover County, but the county has been changed to Pender County since then.
"My father was a physician and surgeon, Dr. S. S. Satchell; my mother, Elizabeth Vanderville Satchell, died when I was three years old. I was the only child by mother. When she died, father married Anne Moore. There were four children by this union, James, S. S., Jr., Paul, and Margaret. Margaret is the present Mrs. Sloan, with whom I make my home. Again my father was bereft of his wife, and he embarked in the last matrimonial adventure. This time he was joined in wedlock to Sarah Sell. He had one child by this marriage, Quincy Bell Satchell.
"My father was indulgent toward me as a child. I commenced to learn my A. B. C.'s at his knee. There were no public schools in North Carolina when I was a child; so, with the best of intentions, my father sent the necessary money to D. Appleton & Company, publisher, and they sent him the blue-backed speller, He began teaching me the alphabet. The book ceased to be interesting to me, a child, after I had absorbed all the tales of the pictures in the front and back; pictures of the bear, the fox, the boy in the apple tree, and the vain girl, with the pail of milk on her hear, going to market. In fact so tedious and tiresome became the be (bay), bi (by), be (bee), and bo (bow), that one day father rode off to see a patient in the midst of a lesson, and I crept out to the well in the yard and threw the Yankee blue-book (as I called it) to the bottom of the well.
"Father gave up the task of teaching me and sent me to a private school, taught by a Mr. Richardson in Wilmington, N. C. Here I found the blue-backed speller again and went through it with just appreciation, as the dunce cap hung on a mail back of the teacher's chair and three hickory switches stood admonitory in the corner of the schoolroom, evident signs of compulsory education in that day and time.
"In my ninth year I was sent to the Moravian School, and it's a God's blessing I was. The school was in charge of a Mr. de Schweinitz. The teachers were kind in disposition, conscientious and thorough in their training, and the knowledge and wisdom I acquired there have been useful all my life. I remained at school until the end of the War.
"Anent that war my father enlisted in the regular troops but was soon detached and placed in charge of one of the base hospitals as physician and surgeon. He was under General Ramsome, brother to 'Nat' Ransome, who became U. S. Senator after the war, that is when he first enlisted. The general's name was Robert Ransome.
"On the day the Yankees entered the town, the school bell was tolled for assemblage of the pupils in the chapel. We were, as a body, cautioned that our welfare and treatment by them would depend much on our decorum of respect and politeness toward them. The first one who appeared was on horseback. He was alone; I remember his frying pan and cooking utensils were arranged about his saddle. Then two came and inquired about the location of the post office and disappeared.
"The next day many strolled and lolled about the school yard and promenade grounds. In a bevy of girls there always is a port one or two. Some remarks of an ill nature passed between the girls and a young officer with more bravado than brains, perhaps, and he secured a U. S. flag and put it flying above the school building. The girls wanted it torn down, but Moravians are the kind of Christians who, in their meekness, submit to persecution. The flag remained flying until the Yankees departed.
"Our school ran out of tea, coffee, and sugar. The substitutes used were red sassafras roots for tea, which we liked; ground okra seed and ground parched corn for coffee, and molasses took the place of sugar.
"The Yankees did no burning or damage to property that I remember. In fact there was a good number of people in the locality who did not believe in secession and a few who thought slavery should be abolished.
"The next school I attached, for three years, was the convent school in Wilmington, N. C. Leaving here, I went to my mother's people, the Vandervilles, In New Jersey. They secured me a position to teach in the public school at Summerville, N. J. The school hours were from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. with an hour's intermission for recess and dinner. I remained here until the death of my father's second wife then he had me to return home, keep house, and govern the four children, my younger brothers and sister.
"When my father married the third time, I went back to New Jersey and was governess in a home of four children until I married a prosperous young lawyer, Frank Darby. We were married nine years, but had no children. His mother got the bulk of his property. I connected to receive as my share, $3,700.00.
"Soon afterward, I secured a position as bookkeeper and cashier of Gailord & Co., in Wilmington, N. C. I studied stenography during my idle hours, and became the stenographer of Governor Russell of North Carolina in 1897. He was a Republican, but a fine, nice gentleman. Afterward, I worked under my brother, Paul, in Washington in the employ of the Sou. Ry. Co. Next, I worked for my brother, S. S. Satchell, Jr., in Philadelphia, until General Otis went to the Phillipine Islands and the company sent my brother there. Following this, I lost all I had saved in a Building and Loan Association while acting as bookkeeper for a real estate and insurance operator, J. C. Reiley, in Wilmington, N. C.
"I next became housekeeper for Father J. A. Gallagher, a Roman Catholic priest, and remained in his household thirteen years, at Newbern, N. C. Then I came to Winnsboro in 1924 to my sister, Mrs. E. D. Sloan, and have resided with her family ever since.
"My brother, S. S., Jr., left the railway employment and obtained Government service in the Phillipines, and he was afterward on the Pacific coast in the service. He helped me until he died in the Presidio Hospital, out in California.
"On my mother's side I am descended from the first white child born in New Amsterdam. He was a de Rapalje child, and his father a de Rapalje built the first house on Staten Island. When the English took charge of New Amsterdam, they changed the name to New York. You see that still leaves me a knickerbocker.
"Yes, I remember the firing on Fort Sumter, near Charleston. I was in my seventh year. General Beauregard had twice made a demand for its surrender, and the third time he told them that the 12th day of April would be the last day of grace. Everybody was solemn on that day, something like the expectancy of an impending total eclipse of sun, which I witnessed afterward in the late 90's. There was no playing on that day, but there was sad anxious faces all around. News came that the fort had been fired on, and, soon afterward, war was declared. My father went out in Capt. Clingham's company, but he was soon transferred into the hospital service. He didn't face any bullets afterward, but he had to meet smallpox and diseases which carried away as many soldiers as grape shot.
"As the war went along, the matter of women and girls dresses received much attention. There was no new cloth available. Old dresses were changed, sometimes turned wrong side out or remodeled. Grown folks' clothes were re-cut and fashioned into girl's dresses, dyed, and retrimmed. The girls wanted to look fresh when the boys came home on furlough. Dyes and dye-stuff was a problem. Madder, copperas, barks, and roots were used to produce various shades of coloring. Designs were nearly impossible; stripes predominated. Economy had to be observed and considered. Well, the styles then were long dresses with trails. You must know that in those days it was the height of immodesty for a woman's ankle to be seen by a man; and a man never know the color of his sweetheart's stockings until the night they got married. Dresses, before the war, required fourteen yards in the making. Women in those times were shawls, each had an ambition to own and wear a cashmere shawl. They were lovely things, costly in material and beautiful in delicate embroideries. One of the everlasting griefs to the womanhood of the South was the searching for and taking away of these shawls when the Yankees made their other depredations in their march through the Confederacy.
"I am an old woman now. I have played in the sunshine, walked underneath clouds, and trudged in the rains of troubles that seemed about to overwhelm me, but I have come out of it all, chastened and resigned to the will of our Heavenly Father.
"The first of next month I'll make my annual visit of three weeks to the Convent of the Sacred Heart, at Belmont, N. C. I shall be very glad to send you a postcard after my arrival, and it will please me to hear from you and my friends in Winnsboro occasionally while there."
KATE FLENNIKEN (white)
80 YEARS OLD.
"My parents were Col. A. H. Patton and Ansley Patton of the Long Cane section, Abbeville County, South Carolina, but I was born while my mother was on a visit to relatives in Haversham County in the State of Georgia. My father was a brother of the late Prof. E. L. Patton of the South Carolina Collage, now University of South Carolina. I attached Woodlawn Academy, and was taught by my uncle, Edward L. Patton.
"There were many Union men in our settlement opposed to nullification and secession. A tragedy in our family grew out of these political issues. My grandfather had been selected by a group of families opposed to nullification to go to Tennessee with the idea of looking about for lands to purchase, so they could move there in a body. On the way, he was ambushed and killed by the Murray gang, as they were known in those days. The murderer, a man named Dooley, was caught, tried, convicted, and hanged for the deed.
"I heard my husband, Mr. Flenniken, talking to you about the blue-back speller for beginners. Well, I remember there was a reading lesson in that book at the end of each spelling lesson, and some of the sentences were full of wisdom and knowledge. As examples, I give these.
1. Visitors should not make their visits too long.
2. A judge must not be a bad man.
3. The first joint of a men's thumb is one inch long.
4. A gambler wants to get money without earning it.
5. There is a near intimacy between drunkenness and poverty.
6. A virago is a turbulent, masculine woman.
7. Pompions are now commonly called pumpkins.
8. One good action is worth many good thoughts.
"I remember the quilting parties in our neighborhood. When the crops were laid by in the summer, quilting parties would begin, and they were held at different plantation homes in the community until late in the fall of the year. Generally each home had one frame of slats. To the home where the party took place, neighbors would bring their frame, and sometimes as many as four quilts were being made at the same time. The quilt frames were arranged on the floor of the room in a rectangle the size of the quilt to be made. A narrow strip of cloth was tacked to the frames all around and the lining of the quilt was sowed to this strip. The frames were then lifted up about the height of a table and rested on their backs. Then the cotton or wool was carded and spread in uniform layers on the lining between the frames. The top of the quilt was assigned to individuals. For instance, each lady would undertake to saw and make a number of squares from the material, another, so many, and so on. As the squares were finished, these were sewed together by others in attendance, until the top of the quilt was completed as a whole. Then the top was placed on the cotton, and the stitching began, from right to last of the frame, the thread going through the bottom lining, cotton, and top covering. The folds could be rolled back as the work went on.
"On some occasions a 'crazy quilt' would be made out of the scraps of satin, silk, and bright colored material. No cotton was used in making the 'crazy quilt'. Some colored cotton cloth was generally used for the lining or under part of these quilts. They were made for beauty and show, instead of warmth and comfort. Every bride in those days was presented with one of such quilts.
"In connection with one of the quiltings, a party was given at the home of the quilting, and out of this social festivity, I opine that some boy was inspired, by a girl named Nellie, to write the song, 'Aunt Dinsh's Quilting Party.'
"My father, Col. A. K. Patton was killed at the first battle of Shiloh. He was an attorney at law, at Abbeville, before the Civil War. I was brought up from childhood in the Associate Reformed Presbyterian faith and doctrine. Every Sabbath morning the slaves zero congregated in the dining room of our home and taught the Shorter Catechism.
"I was married to my husband, Warren H. Flenniken, at Abbeville, in 1881, and came as a bride to Winnsboro.
"Outside of our church work and immediate family welfare, I have been deeply interested in the erection of the Confederate Monument in Winnsboro, and in the observance of Memorial Day.
"Shortly after our marriage in the early eighties, the woman of Fairfield County organized the Ladies Memorial Association. This, by the way, was the virtual beginning of the present U. D. C. Chapter, which came into a distance twenty years later. We ladies worked with one end in view, that of erecting a suitable memorial to the brave men of Fairfield, who fought and sacrificed so much for a cause they believed was right. After years of planning and hard work, in the way of entertainments, such as strawberry and ice cream parties and festival suppers, enough money was on hand to build a monument of our own Fairfield granite. Daughters of the Confederacy that the monument was placed and dedicated in the public square at the intersection of Washington and Congress Streets in Winnsboro.
"In these days on a standing occasion of the whole year was Memorial Day. An elaborate program was arranged and curried out. Pride and pleasure thrilled the hearts of the young girls of the town, as they took part in the parade, all dressed alike in costumes made especially for the occasion. The procession marched up Congress Street, headed by the Gordon Light Infantry, with the old veterans bringing up the rear, all keeping step to the music of our own brass band. Mrs. W. R. Robertson was the first president of the association; Mrs. H. A. Gaillard succeeded her and serried a number of years; and she was followed by Mrs. Sailing Wolfe, who I think was the grandmother of Bernard Barton, now a great financier in New York.
"When the merger took place, the U.D.C. Chapter was named for General John Bratton, the highest ranking officer living in the county at the time. A great dinner was given in honor of the veterans, and barrels of lemonade were on the picnic grounds for their refreshment every Memorial Day.
"The ranks of veterans great thinner and thinner as the years rolled by, and now there is only one left. My husband, Warren. Our Chapter once honored me with the presidency. We contributed funds to the erection of the Jefferson Davie Memorial, the Arlington Monument, the Shiloh Monument, and others. At present, the chapter is subscribing and maintaining scholarships in different institutions of learning; namely, Winthrop, the University <text not clear>
FAIRFIELD COUNTY
WARREN HARVEY FLENNIKEN
(white)
69 YEARS OLD.
Warren Flennikon is the oldest resident in the town of Winnsboro, Fairfield County, S. C. He is the only surviving Confederate soldier in Fairfield County. He and his wife reside in one of the fashionable homes on North Congress Street. His son-in-law, Charles F. Elliott, and his family reside with him.
"I was born October 5, 1848, in the Hopewell community of Chester County S. C. My father was the Have Warren Flennikon, an Associate Reformed Presbyterian minister, and pastor of the Hopewell A.R.P. Church. My mother, before marriage, was June Hearst Pressley. My brothers, Samuel Pressley, John Calvin, and David Reid, and my sisters, Mary and Sarah are all dead. My father died in 1851, when I was a boy three years old. My mother lived to be ninety-one, and passed away to heaven June, 1903. After my father's death, my mother married Thomas Torbit of Chester S.C. She, upon the death of Mr. Torbit, came and lived the remainder of her life with me.
"The school in our neighborhood of Hopewell was taught by two sisters, the Misses Webster. Yes, it was a school that charged tuitions each pupil paid so much per month. The teachers bearded around with different families. I remember the old blue-back speller for beginners. A picture was in the back of the book, showing a small boy up an apple tree being threatened with a stone in the hand of the owner of the orchard. Again, another picture was that of a woman going to market with a pail of milk on her head.
"We learned the three H's reading, 'riting and 'rithmetic, and geography, too. Every Friday, we had a spelling match from the blue-back speller. Every pupil stood against the wall, the length of the whole room. Words were called by the teacher. When a pupil failed to spell a word correctly, it was passed to the next child. Should the next spell it incorrectly, it was passed on until correctly spelled by a pupil; and the successful one went up the line. It was a great honor to be at the head, and a disgrace to be at the foot of the line, when the test was concluded.
"There was not much playing in my school days. We commended school at 8 a.m., and were instructed until 12 m. At the hour's intermission we ate our lunches and played games. We resumed study and recitations at 1 p.m. and continued until we were dismissed at 4 p.m.
"Father had a small farm and about twenty slaves. After his death, mother and my older brother managed the farm, and I worked on the farm on Saturday. The slaves were taken to church on the Sabbath, when the roads were passable. The road system in my boyhood days was a wretched one. The slaves sat in the gallery of the church. Pianos and organs were regarded as sinful and sacrilegious in the observance of God's worship. Mr. J. W. Bigman was the 'leader' and another member was the 'liner-out'. Nothing but psalms were permitted to be sung in Hopewell Church. The 'liner-out' would read two lines in a loud voice. The 'leader' would rap his turning fork on the benak by him, hold it near his ear and 'h'ist' the tune. A pause took place between each two lines, until the psalm of praise was rendered.
"Another peculiarity was the preparatory services before taking the communion on the following Sabbath. These services began in Friday and war continued, with two sermons a day, until the Sabbath. On Friday and Saturday an elder of the church stood at the door, and the departing <text not clear> obtained a metal taken from him, which they had to present at the communion, table on the Sabbath; otherwise he or she could not participial. The tokens were collected at the table and retained by the officers, until the next preparatory services for church communion. Yes, the slaves were encouraged to join in the singing; they were given tokens, and they commend at the table following the service to the white people.
"Mr. R. W. Bride was the pastor at Hopewell following my father. He married a school teacher, Miss Steel, and rested a fine family of boys and girls. He was insistent on boys and girls, white and black, learning the <text not clear> Catechism. Card playing, deneing, shows, and theaters were preached against in our community as works of the world, the fleas, and the devil.
"No tried to make enough on the farm to feed and cloths ourselves and our slaves. The latter ate, and there was very little distinction in every-day clothes. Their health was of primary concern to mother.
"I am now six feet and one inch in height. I was a tell boy of sixteen years when I went to the Civil War. I left my mother at the gate of the home, weeping. I was in Certain Jiles J. Patterson's company, 3rd S. C. State Troops, Col. Gooding was the Regimental Commander. We were taken first to <text not clear>, a small place dear Augusta, Gar, and thereafter to James Island near Charleston, S. C. My service was not long. I enlisted in November 1864, and the war ended in April 1865, but I learned that war is hell. I am the only living Confederate soldier in Fairfield County.
"I married Carrie Bradley of Abbeville, S. C. November 10, 1869. She lived only four months thereafter I then came to Winnsboro and clerked for my brother, David R. Flenniken, who was in the <text not clear> business. Shortly after moving there, I married my present wife, Rate, who was a daughter of Col. A. K. Patton of Abbeville, a brother of the late Prof. E. L. Patton of the South Carolina College. Our marriage took place in Abbeville in 1881. She will have attained her eighty-first birthday if she lives until the 10th of next August. Perhaps you had better interview her separately, for I assure you it will be a longer and more informative interview of old time dresses and social customs than I can give.
"There was a deep abiding affection existing between the slave owners and the slaves. In was manifested all through the war and for a while after the war ended. I don't think there would have been any trouble had it not been for the adventurer and carpetbagger, who seized upon the opportunity to inflame the Negro's passionate desire for social equality and the race's power of equal suffrage at the ballet box.
"The military rule was not as oppressive as the carpetbag, <text not clear> government's misrule. What the Ku Klux Klan failed to do by illegal violence, the Redshirt movement later accomplished by awe and persuasion.
"At this junction I think I'll tell you of a sensational killing that took place in Winnsboro and the subsequent trill in the courthouse that grew out of it. A writer of those times days.
"In those troublous times, the Republican county treasurer, Clark, was killed by a prominent citizen, William D. Aiken, in an alteration about certain taxes claimed to have been paid by Sam Dullosey a cousin of Aiken. Mrs. Aiken interfered in behalf of his friend and cousin, who was small and frail of stature. Clark was a larger and much more powerful man in physique and a trength. In the struggle that ensued, the county treasurer was killed. The case came up in the courthouse at Winnsboro before Judge Rutland, a renegade Judge, and a mixed jury of republicans and Democrats. It was and still is regarded as the most celebrated case ever tried in Fairfield County. With the Solicitor, for the prosecution, appeared Daniel H. Chamberlain and Zeb Vance, afterward governors of south Carolina and North Carolina respectively. For the defense were Col. Janes H. Rion, James B. McCants and General M. C. Butler. In later years Butler was a United States Senator. Chamberlain made one of the greatest speeches of his brilliant career. As a legal argument it could not have been surpassed. In persuasive tone it was incomparable. He said in one of his flights of eloquence, which I try to paraphrase:
'On the continent of our finest civilization, a range of mountains dress its lengthy chain of peaks in grandeur and beauty. It is the frequented spot of all native lovers. One of its grandest peaks is that of Mont Blanc in Switzerland. As the rains come from heaven above, the drops falling on one side trickle their way down, forming rills and streamlets that reach the beautiful valleys. These are dotted with the homes of a happy and prosperous people. Here is peaca! Homes with innocent, laughing children. Here man loves his fellow men. Justice rules. Nothing is feared but God above. On the other side of the Alps, the raindrops meet the bitter, freezing, eastern winds. They precipitate into lay pellets. They collect to form the dreadful avalanche. In time, the force of gravity causes it to rush down the mountain side, carrying death and destruction are impossible. The verdict of this jury will decide on which side our civilization will fall - law or anarchy!'
"Chamberlain curtained the sinile, out in spite of his able and eloquent advocacy and the aid of his resourceful conferees, the inscrutable design of Providence ruled that it was better for the progress of both races chat the defense should come out victor in the trial.
"I shall be very glad for you to come again next week and interview Mrs. Flenniken. I am sure you will find it worthwhile, and we will be glad to see you."
SOCIAL CUSTOMS OF THE PAST
LONGSTHEET GANTT
(white)
82 YEARS OLD.
Mr. Contt is a citizen of Winnsboro, Fairfield County, South Carolina. He resides with his wife and widowed daughter. Evelyn Ferguson, on West Liberty Street, which is one block west of St. John's Episcopal Church, of which he is a devoted number.
"I was born near the courthouse in the town of Barnwell, Barnwell County, S. C. July 10, 1868. My father and mother were Richard A. Gantt and Louisa Key Gantt. My grandfather was Judge Richard Gantt. Edwin J. Scott, in his 'Random Recollections', gays: 'Judge Gantt with the kindest heart in the world always leaned to mercy's side and took the part of the accused, <text not clear> that the prosecuting attorney. General Caldwell, used to say that he kept a tally of the prisoners tried, where he put down all acquittals on the Judge's side and all the convictions on his own.' I think he was the first public advocate of temperance in the State, in which he was followed and far outdone by Judge O'Neill. He was extremely afraid of fire, and, when holding court in Columbia, he always ledged on the ground floor. Sometimes, to avoid the apprehended danger, he stayed at the home of John Smith, a pious Methodist. One night when he was there, Mr. Smith conducted family prayer, and, when it was over, grandfather said: 'Smith you sure are a d--- swinge eat at prayer.'
"Once when a clergyman spent the night at grandfather's house, the whole household was called in for family worship, and at the minister's request the Judge agreed to lead the devotions. While thus engaged, a little dog in the room discovered that something unusual was going on, and commenced sniffing, barking, and jumping around the kneeling Judge, who tried by raising his voice to drown the noise made by the little dog. But in had the contrary effect, and, when his Honor could stand the annoyance no longer, he suddenly changed his tone and turned to a slave, saying. 'Damn that dogs take him out,' then resumed and concluded his prayer.
"There were no graded schools in my boyhood. Wealthy families had tutors, but there was a school in Barnwell that charged tuition that I attended. It had but one teacher, the Rev. Havner. There was about one hundred pupils. The beginners were taught their A. B. C's; these were charged a dollar per month. The old blue-back speller was the first book. When pupils reached the column 'Baker,' they were charged one dollar and fifty cents a month. When pupils reached long division in <text not clear>, they wore charged thereafter two dollars a month. At recess the small boys played marbles, mumble pug rolly-poley, and I spy. The larger boys and girls played antony-over Every pupil, on Fridays, had to get up and declaim. 'Marco Hossaris' was a favorite; 'Twinkle Twinkle Little Star' was shouted by the small boy; 'Good-bye Little Birdie' was murmured by the small girl, while the more ambitious recited Shakespeare's '<text not clear> Countrymen and Lovers,' 'Brutus' Speech,' and 'Regales' Return to Rome.'
"What parties were the most popular? You mean in a social sense? Well, 'pound parties.' These were assemblies in private homes; each couple brought a package of something to eat for the cable. Some Negro fiddler was on hand, and steal partners, the Virginia reel, and the cotillion were danced, but round dancing was so much preached against that our neighborhood didn't dare indulge in it. There were sewing bees among the ladies, before the war. They would take the slaves who were handy with the needle to a neighboring home and make clothing for the household and the slaves. Some of these 'bees' were carried on during the Civil War; making gammonts for the Confederate Soldiers. Oh, yes, we had candy pullings, before and after the war, when I was a boy.
"The 4th of July was generally celebrated with a barbecue and a public speaking. Christmas was the day of days to the small boy and girl, with the hanging up of stockings and socks the night before Christmas; the joyous shouts of the early morning day; the popping of firecrackers; and the thrilling cry of. 'See what Santa Claus brought me?' Everybody, white and black, old and young shouted around, 'Christmas give!,' and expected something if caught.
"My father, Richard Gantt, lived in town but had a plantation in the country. He had slaves few the form and special household slaves in town. My elder brother Richard Plantagenet Gantt, managed, in a great measure, the plantation and slaves. The blacksmith, the carpenter, and the stable man had special privileges. Old Uncle Ransom took care of the jackass that did service for the surrounding neighbors. Uncle Ransom was a slave preacher. I remember to this day the words on his pace permitting him to go about from place to place. They more:
'This is to let Rev. Ransom pass
On his feet or on his ass,
Till sale day December next.
To preach a <text not clear> and a text.
For ten miles through the country 'round
I hope his ass won't throw him down.'
(signed) R. P. Gantt.
"Can. Johnson Hagood was a cousin of mine. He was the first confederate soldier. He accounted for it in this way. South Carolina was the first state to secede from the Union. Governor W. H. Gist called for volunteers to defend the State's action. General Hagood was authorized to raise a regiment and the assembly of volunteers took place near Barnwell Courthouse. Gen. Hagood had long tables of rough lumber in rows. On these tables were laid out the muster rolls for the signatures of the men. He dismounted from his horse, on the occasion, made a speech to the crowd, explaining the gravity of the enlistment, and, at the conclusion of has talk, stepped forward, took a pen, and was the first to sign the enlistment papers. Thereafter, when the Confederate States of America were formed. President Jefferson Davis called for 5,000 volunteers. The brigade as formed by Gen. Hagood was transferred as a body to the Confederacy and is known in history as 1st S. C. Brigade (Hagood), to distinguish it from 1st S. C. Brigade (Gregg) N.B. (One can see how Gen. Hagood could justly make this claim).
"No one can live on earth eighty-two years and observe the splendor and lordly lavishness of the old land and slaveholding aristocracy; the alarming strife; bloodshed and stress of the uncivil war (I call it), and feel the stings of the outrageous scalawag and carpetbag governments and the thrills of participations in the Hampton redemption, without a profound sense of gratitude to such men as Hampton, Butler, Gary, Bratton, Hagood, Aldither, and Haskelis. And George and Ben Tillman must be remembered, too, for the part they took in the Ellenton rict.
"I had just attained my majority of twenty-one years and was in the heat of the conflict to redeem the State under such Barnwell County leaders as Gen. Hagood, Col. Rub't Aldrich, Col. Claude Sawyer, Duncan Ballenger, and Carroll Simms. At that time I owned a beautiful bay horse, named 'Wade Hampton', and I was a horseback courier. I carried a peculiar banner in the red-shirt parades. The banner pictured a rascal in flight carrying a carpetbag end a young boy in pursuit, kicking the carpetbagger vigorously in his posterior median anatomy. On one side of the banner was emblazoned:
Boy- 'Leave here John and steal no more.'
Radical- 'I'm gwine now don't kick me so.'
On the abserve side of the banner were the words;
'We will, of course, vote for F. K. Gantt, and woe to the Red who says we shan't and Hampton Shall he governor!'
"My brother F. H. Gantt was elected solicitor in this campaign of 1876. I am the only one living now of twelve children. This lady's gold watch is an heirloom, bought by my maternal grandfather, Frederick K. Hat, in Liverpool, England, one hundred and eighteen years ago, and was presented to my grandmother, Susan Cynthia Hay. You can see her initials faintly engraved on the case, 'S.C.H.' This timepiece descended to my mother, who lived to be eighty-one years old, next to my brother, Richard Plantagenet Gantt, who were it all thru the Civil War, and it came to me on my twenty-first birthday. Its mechanism must be good, as it has needed no repair nor adjustment in the past forty-seven years.
"Other great men I have known were Bishop Ellison Capers and Dr. Gerradore. I was admitted to the bar in 1888 and practiced with my brother, F. H. Gantt, until I was elected Probate Judge of Bardwell County.
"I am a member of St. John's Episcopal Church, Winnsboro, I married Lavinia Slcinner in Trinity Church, Columbia. Mr. Glass performed the ceremony. We have four girls and one boy. Evelyn, Mrs. Ferguson, lost her husband last summer and lives with us. Joe lost his life over seas, as a soldier in the World War. Louins is the wife of State senator, J. M. Lyles, Annie died, unmarried. Julia, the youngest, is Mrs. LeBruce, and her home is in Georgetown, S. C. I often visit her and enjoy watching the waves of the harbor lapping the shares of the beautiful bay of old Georgetown.
"Well, I have rambled a good deal, I guess I have tired you, but your compensation must be that you have given no great joy by listening so patiently to an old octogenarian who seldom gets sayings to talk to of the years that are guns."
ELLA E. GOODING
80 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
ROBERT C. GOODING
82 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Mr. & Mrs. Robert C. Gooding are husband and wife. They live in a two-story residence on the north side of Bratton Street, Winnsboro, S. C. On the south side of the same street, immediately facing their residence, is the beautiful high school building recently completed as a Public Works Administration project, of the United States Government.
Mrs. Gooding: "My people are of English and Scotch descent. My grandfather was Clerk of Court in Fairfield County for sixteen years before the Civil War. My father, Henry Laurens Elliott, was a large land and slave owner and president of the Winnsboro Bank before that war. He first married Mary McMaster. There were five children by that union. On the death of his first wife, he married Tirzah Ketchin, my mother. By this marriage there were nine children. Do you wish me to name all of the children? As many as I care to? Well, the five by the McMaster wife were Mrs. J. P. Matthews, Mrs. Burr R. Rosborough, Mrs. A. F. Ruff, Mrs. Joe Cummings and a son, John Elliott, who was killed in the Civil War. By the Ketchin wife there were T. K. Elliott, Mrs. T. K. McDonald, Mrs. J. P. Caldwell, Henry L. Elliott, Mrs. Lula McAlpin, Mrs. Oliver Johnson, Helen, who died in Childhood, and myself.
"I was born about two miles northeast of Winnsboro, in our plantation home on the Peay's Ferry road, February 5, 1858. I learned my A.B.C.'s, how to spell, and how to read in a school of twelve pupils, taught privately in Winnsboro by Miss Susan A. Finney. Then my two older half sisters took me in charge for a year. Following such preparation, I was again sent to town to Mr. Benjamin Rhett <text not clear>, a teacher in a private tuition school in the old Beaty house. The house is next to the Carolina Theatre building on South Congress Street. When I was fourteen years old, an Episcopal rector undertook my preparation for Woman's College, at Due West, S. C. He was a splendid teacher. He afterward attained his D. D. degree, and for many years was rector of St. Paul's Episcopal Church of Charleston, S. C.
"Dr. J. I. Bonner was in charge of Woman's College when I was there in 1872 to 1876. After I was graduated, I taught in my Alma Mater one year. In 1877, I accepted a position as teacher here in Mt. Zion Insitute.
"The society girls in our set were Sallie McMaster, Hattie McMaster, Annie McMaster, Mattie Beaty, Lula Center, Bell Golding, Kittie Rion, Anna Phinney, Mary Shaw, Lill and Marion Elliott, and my sisters.
"The boys in our set were T. K. Elliott, T. H. Ketchin, W. H. Flenniken, W. T. Crawford, J. E. McDonald, W. J. Elliott, J. M. Beaty, W. A. Beaty, J. F. McMaster, H. B. McMaster, and my husband, R. C. Gooding.
"We had regular monthly dances in the Thespian Hall on Washington Street. The music rendered was by an amateur string band. The Gordon Light Infantry, a fine military company, was part of our social life. They took prizes in company drills, once in Charlotte and once in New Orleans. They gave an annual picnic in Fortune Park every year. This was a great event in the social life of the town. A target practice and shooting match came off then, and speeches and prizes were given for the best drilled man in the company and for the best marksmanship. I remember W. A. Beaty was best in the manual of arms, and Mr. J. O. Boag was the poorest marksman. His attempts were always laughable and none enjoyed it more than he did.
"Now I had best let my husband tell you about some things, and I'll probably want to have the last word before you go."
Mr. Gooding, "I was born in the State of Kentucky, October 20, 1855, but my father, A. F. Gooding, and my mother with the family, moved to Polk County, Missouri, when I was but a child. My father joined the Confederate Army, although we were living in a state that didn't go with the seceded states.
"Yankees came often to our house in search for father, and they showed mother the tree on which they proposed to hang him if he was ever caught by them. They took off all our slaves without our leave, for which we never received any compensation. Mother decided to take the family, consisting of my two young brothers, Sterling and Charles, my sister, Bell, and myself back to the old home in Kentucky.
"After the war in 1869, father moved us to Winnsboro here my wife and I were married. Our children were all born here, married here, and have given us grandchildren, the joy of our old age. My son, Robert, married in Brooklyn, New York. He died early. His son, Robert, is in the freshman class at the U. S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Md. My daughters, Nellie, Laura, and Christine, live here in Winnsboro.
"The military rule in Winnsboro was not oppressive; however, it was distasteful to have a Negro company of U. S. troops located here. There was no marauding, no insolence, although they were stationed here six months on Mt. Zion campus. They were transferred later and white soldiers sent in their stead. Their barracks were in the Presbyterian woods in the southern part of the town. I remember there were a good many Germans in this company who couldn't speak English to amount to much.
"The Ku Klux Klan was a necessary organization and did much to discharge weak white men and ignorant Negroes from lowliness. When the Ku Klux Klan wished to get rid of an undesirable white man or Negro, they would put an empty coffin at the undesirable person's front door. It usually caused the warned one to disappear. Although not a Ku Klux, one night I witnessed a parade of white-sheeted riders and recognized my own horse in the parade. In the morning my horse was in his stable, as usual. I asked no questions about the occurrence until years afterward.
"I have never cared for any other occupation than that of farming, nor any other method of locomotion than that of horseback riding and buggy riding. I bought an automobile once, but I soon returned to the use of my horse and buggy, which I use every day.
"What is the cause of so much soil erosion? Well, it had its origin in slavery time. The land owner had plenty of land and plenty of slave labor, but he didn't have fertilizer and a scientific knowledge of agriculture.
"In the days of Abraham, people lived in tents with their herds around them. When the grazing at that spot was exhausted, they moved to, another spot. Likewise, in slavery time, when a field ceased to be profitable it was abandoned and woods were cleared off to make new ground for tillage, and no care was taken of the old lands, which rapidly washed into gullies.
"After the Civil War, our people had no money. No became a one-crop people. Cotton was ready money. Northern manufacturers and western farmers encouraged this, and we were without scientific knowledge. Speculators manipulated all the profit out of cotton by a system of exchanges, grades, and quotations. A system of credit was inaugurated by the State Lion Law. By this system the farmer paid tribute to the local Caesar, twenty-five to fifty times the price for plantation supplies.
"The farmer, like the fabled eat, fell year by year further behind and finally was brought to mortgage his lands outright for the year's advances and to secure the old extortionate debt. More cotton was to be planted than ever before, to keep up the interest, compounded in many instances. Foreclosure came on slowly but surely. The lands were usually bought in by the supply merchant, who cared very little about the land but a great deal about the goods on the shelves. The supply merchant usually put Negroes on the acquired lands wather than white people. He sold each one a mule and a wagon, not forgetting the usual 25% time price, and thus calculated how much merchandise he could put out for the oncoming years. He rarely, if ever, visited the land, except in the growing season to calculate the value of the cotton in prospect and the safety to himself of future advances that crop year to the particular man that land was rented to.
"The saddest picture of slavery is the aftermath. Our country is riven with gullies and the old aristocratic colonnaded homes are in dilapidation and occupied by Negroes."
Mrs. Gooding; "My family were members of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church. In the early days we used metal tokens in taking communion. We have never relinquished our ideas about singing <text not clear> on the Sabbath.
"When I arrived to the years of womanhood, the hoop skirt was passing out of style, and the bustle and tight long shirts were the vogue. The style lacked comfort, and the corsets were cruel and suffocating and actually injurious to the spirit and health of women and girls.
"The women arranged their hair with a chignon and looped it upon the top of the head. Young girls arranged their hair in 'pig tails down the back and wore bangs over the forehead. The longer a woman's hair, the more she had to be conceited about. The ladies often bought 'switched,' hair corresponding with her own, in which she used the 'switch' in connection with the chignon arrangement. Is chignons synonymous with rats? I can't say positively, but I am inclined to think so.
"When I was young, every woman and girl had a sunbonnet. The women wore them about the yard and garden, and the girls wore them to school. They did this to avoid sunburn and freckles. Freckles still remain the terror of womanhood, but lotions and cosmetics have put the sunbonnet into the discard or attic.
"Every girl had a sidesaddle, a riding habit, and a crop. In front of the home was the riding black where she mounted and dismounted her pony. Some of these old blacks and hitching posts many yet be seen about the county. The elderly ladies of the family had beaded handbags. They would fill these with tea cakes when they went to church, so they could keep the small children quiet during a long sermon by giving then one occasionally.
"We had portrait painters in my youth but no photographers. The daguerreotype was used to a limited extent. Some of these were exquisite but were exposed to light, and they soon faded and were useless.
"Visiting in my girlhood among neighbors was frequent and more cordial and enjoyable than now. We would go in the morning about ten o'clock, have dinner, and remain until after tea before leaving.
"How do I account for the decline of neighborly visiting? I think, in a great measure, the decline has been due to the multiplication of church circles, social clubs, and automobile rides. Each church denomination has four or five circles that meet once a week. Literary and music clubs and card parties have their meeting, and automobile rides are taken to surrounding towns, which may be reached by good roads. Then, too, the fixed changes of a household have to be taken into consideration, such as electricity, sutomobile upkeep, and gas. All this precludes the thought of frequent lavish entertainment.
"One of the regrettable changes. I observe, is the seeming lack of respect and consideration shown by young people toward their parents and old people. Boys and men do not exercise the same courtly manner toward girls and women as they formerly did. Just one incident to explain myself; Young men drive up to a young lady's home in an automobile, honk the horn, and sit until the young lady comes down to the automobile door. Men do not even observe the courtesy to get out of the car and help the girl inside. In my youth, such an engagement would be made first by a written note. If accepted, the man would go to the home get out, walk to the door, ring the bell, and accompany the young lady down the walk to the automobile, open the door, and assist her inside and see that she was comfortably seated.
"Lipstick and rouge would have scandalized a girl in my young days. The only vanity and affectation allowed was a cutgrass bottle with a silver top. They called it the salts bottle, but I never heard of it containing anything other than hartshorn or spirits of ammonia."
PAIRFIELD COUNTY
JANE HUTCHINSON
(white)
82 YEARS OLD.
Jane Hutchinson lives in the village of Monticello, Fairfield County, S. C. She owns her home and the three surrounding acres of land. She is much venerated by the people in the community and respected at home and abroad as an authority on unpublished local history. She is still spry for her age, and X found her, hoe in hand, attending to her garden March 11, 1958.
"Well, what has fetched you over here? Is you the Wood Dixon that stretches your blanket in the Fairfield News and Herald so often? Well, well, I'm happy to see you and set you straight on some things that I know more about than you. Why your many, Sallie Woodward, went to school right in this town, to old Mr. Hazel Zealy, while the war was going on.
"How old is it? Last Sunday I was eighty-two years old, and spry as a cricket. Bet I can out run you to the door of my house younder, and when we git there this half-bull pup will be sitting on the top step waiting for the door to open.
"Who are these men you got with your Strangers ain't they? Well, glad to see you all, and the first thing I wants to know is, can you all stay and take a bite of dinner with me? No? Well, I've showed my manners, anyway, by inviting you to break bread with me.
"My father, Archibald Hutchinson, came from Ireland, my mother. Anne Jane McCullough, came from County Antrim, Ireland. They came over first to New York and gradually made their way down to Monticello. They had only one other child, my brother, Robert, two years older than me, who is dead. My father was a tailor by trade, and, this neighborhood being thickly settled by rich land owners and slaveholders, he moved here about 1848, so he said.
"My people begin plain working folks. I didn't take part in the great 'to do's,' such as cotillion dances and all kinds of parties. My father made the fashionable clothes for the men  broadcloth coats, nankeen trousers, and showy westcoats  and mother was kept busy making riding coats, polonaise dresses, and riding skirts. You know rode on horseback in those times, but not straddle-wise or straddle-legged as they do now: they had sidesaddles. It will always be a mystery to me how the girls could sit sideways on spirited horses, race them, and stay on and not tumble off; they could though. Well, we kept in our tailor shop, hoops and bustles, the style in those days for women folks. Ladies hats have changed as much as any part of their dress. The larger the hat and the more ostrick plumes on it, the more fashionable a woman was regarded.
"I was a small child before the war. My mother, however, was always invited to the quilting parties and, in a measure, was chief superintendent of the work. Not far removed from African savagery, the Negro slaves did not requires much attention as to clothing. The older ones received some warm clothing in winter and wooden-bottom shoes in winter. You can see from here (indicating) where old Mr. Kelly had his tannery. When the Yankees came in their raids they went to the tannery and with their bayonets punched holes in every hide and side of leather Mr. Kelly had down there.
"You can see the Turkey Jim Davis house yonder (indicating), where Kilpatrick, in charge of the Yankee cavalry, made his headquarters. The house belongs to Mr. Sam Robinson now, why was it called Turkey Jim Davis house? Well, you see it was built by Dr. James Davis in slavery time. Dr. Davis' mother was Rebecca Kincaid, daughter of old Capt. Kincaid who operated the first cotton gin the world, they say. He got the idea from the way he pulled the cockle burs out of the wool he sheared from his sheep. But let me get back to Dr. Davis. He was the largest cotton planter of his time. The Sultan of Turkey heard about him, from the United States Ambassador over there, and he offered him a high salary, for six years, to come over to Turkey and show the Turks how to plant, cultivate, and produce cotton and git it into lint. The Turks are a lazy set. He found out he couldn't get work out of them in the cotton fields over there. He caused and reared around among them and kicked up such a fuss that the Sultan paid him the salary for the six years and let him come home. The assistant took Dr. Davis' place in supervising the cotton raising. Dr. Davis said he found a great difference in working Negroesslaves and in working Turks.
"On his return, he brought with him a jackass, an Arabian stallion, some mares, cashmere goats, a peculiar cow, called the bramah cow, and shanghai chickens. He was known as Dr. Turkey Jim Davis. The cows were white. The one I remember of the increase, years after was called 'Snow Ball.' The milkd was sweeter than ordinary cow's milkd, and children were very fond of it.
"Both my parents joined the Old Brick Church, back yonder on Little River. Rev. C. E. McDonald, in a sketch of the old church printed in a book entitled, 'The Centennial History of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church, said: 'Mrs. Hutchinson, a member of the church, remembered hearing her mother and others tell that, after the crops were ladd by, their fathers and grandfathers would go to the brickyard and tramp the mud into mortar with their bare feet, put in into mould with their hands, carry it out into the sun to dry, and then burn the kilns by night and day; and that the church was completed in 1788." It stands today as strong and as solid as at first, showing that men of ye olden times did their work well. This is the church building where the South Carolina Synod of the A. R. P. denomination met for the first time.
"The Yankoed crossed at Freshley's Ferry and came on through to Monticello. The officers were courteous gentlemen, the rank-and-file ruffians, bent on plunder and every kind of mischief. A detail of soldiers were allowed to protect the boarding school. It was located about where Mrs. Nan McMeeking lives now. When the soldiers marches away and reached the Old Brick Church on the banks of Little River, they found that the Confederates had destroyed the bridge. They tore up the flooring of the church building and used it, in part, to construct a bridge, over which they marched.
"We didn't have round dances in our day and time, but, at the end of a quilting party, we danced the Virginia reel, steal partners, and the clog; and played 'thimble' and 'heavy heavy hangs over your head.' We had sewing bees often during the war, to make clothing and socks for the soldiers. Yes, I remember the candy pullings had by the young people. A boy and girl did the pulling, with melted butter on their hands to keep the sweet stuff from sticking to them.
"During and while after the war, coffee and sugar was scarce as hens' teeth. A substitute for coffee was parched corn, and for sugar, sorgum or molasses. Well, as I was a poor girl, I don't know much about the southern hospitality and the visiting around of the blue-bloods; and, as I never married, you'd better ask somebody that has been married and had a whole passel of children about family life in them days.
"The first public school in Monticello after the war was taught by Capt. Hayne McMeckin, a graduate of the South Carolina College. Some said he was tinctured with atheism that he took from old Prof. Cooper at the college. In spite of it, though, he made a good teacher, was a good man, and late in life joined the Baptist Church. When he quit teaching, he went to farming. He was elected to the legislature and later became county treasurer. His memory is treasured here now for the good that he did, while many of the names of the blue-bloods and aristocrats are forgotten.
"My people not being among the gentry, I know very little about slave quarters or slave rations. I only know that every slave owner, being anxious to increase the number of his slaves, caused the females to bear children too early in life; but an owner had a doctor to look after the health of the slaves as faithfully as he did his own family.
"I remember old Governor John Hugh Means, that introduced the Means grass in this section. Some call it Egyptian grass and some, Johnson grass. I've heard that Gov. Johnson of Alabama got the seed from Egypt and sent some to Governor Means when he (Means) was governor in 1852. The old governor was a tall, red-faced, fiery man, hot for secession; but he did have the nobleness to go to war, and he got killed at Bull Run, while most of the other fiery-mouthed politicians stayed at home.
"You must go by and see Miss Nan (Mrs. McMeckin), and I'm sure she can give you all the book learning and old newspaper accounts of the sayings and doings in old-time Monticello."
