Moses Alexander
Melpomene & Poydras Sts.
Interviewed 2/28/39
Submitted 3/3/39
"AH GOT RELIGION."
"Ev'ry man's got a right at a philosophy of life, facts is ev'ry man's got a philosophy. Mine is whiskey. Ah luves it. Facts is, thats what keeps me a sinner in mah own way. Cose, Ah aint no sinner in the way of the Lawd, cause the Lawd aint never said man aint got no right drinkin'. Them damn preachers brought that mess in the world."
If the above may be considered a philosophy of life, give credit of surmising it to Moses Alexander, an old crippled but carefree Negro who doesn't quite remember his age but thinks he is about seventy-eight years old. It isn't unusual for Moses to forget. He very often forgets his address. "The most important thing for me to re'member is when that worldfare (Welfare) check is comin'," he says.
Moses was sitting on a neighbor's step with his eyes looking far into empty space when contacted. He was alone, wearing a too-big black coat, blue overalls and a brown hat. An 1874 style walking cane was leaning by his side. Moses is a fine looking old man, having gray beards, keen features and a smooth black color. He speaks slowly but positively, looking you straight in the eyes. Every now and then Moses would hum a wordless tune, but he didn't know the name of it. When questioned how could he hum a tune without knowing its name, Moses remonstrated! “That Ah don't know. But there aint nothin’ wrong wid mah memory, Ah jests fo'gits, thats all."
He continued: "Ah could say Ah was feeling fine but mah limbs is all stowed up. That rheumatism, you know. It gits you when you gits old. Boy, don't never git old. You don't know the hell of a fix you'll be in. Wish Ah'd never done it." Moses sat in idle reverie for a minute or two and then he spoke again: "I jest come down hyar to git mah stuff but it aint been issued yet. (He was referring to Welfare commodities) I got to be hyar a little bit longer. Cause Ah reckon these people got to take their time. (All of a sudden Moses became suspicious) You aint one of them mittes, is you? No? Thats right Ah done s-e-e-en you. (Moses was nervous; he was biting his words, because he slipped and told his philosophy of life) Them mittes don't want in you to drink up yo' money. They will cut you off, if they knows it. Ah'm sho glad you aint no mittee? Did you say lets take a little drink? (Moses has a very convenient way of hearing things) Ah reckon Ah drinks any thing, wine, whiskey, gin, like that. Oh well, anything thats drinkable. (He pulled his commodity card from his coat pocket) You see this blue card? This gits you the grub. The lady takes this and gazes at it. The number of them people you is got is on there. If you number one on it you git for one, if you got number two on it you git for two, and if you got three on you git for three. Mine is got two on it, so Ah git for two. Who is the two? Mah wife. Ah aint got her now though. Man, she's crazy. That fool went crazy prayin'. Used to wake up in the mornin' talkin' bout the devil says he was goin' to arrest her mind. Well, he did. She's arrested and rested right smack in Jackson. No, she aint never done me nothin'. Ah wouldn't let. Uh. Don't Ah look lak somebody whose got sense enough to git out a crazy woman's way? jest lak Ah can git out the rain Ah sho can git out of a crazy woman's way. No indeed! Ah aint never fo'got that. Man, thats jest lak fo'gittin' to duck from a Joe Louis punch."
It is too bad, but Moses forgot when all of this happened."Fo'give me, Ah done plum fo'got when mah wife went crazy. But Ah thinks that it must er been five yars ago." At this point, Moses was wiping his beards, sort of striking them like a man does who quickly finishes a strong drink. He cleared his throat too, "You know, Ah reckons that a man must not drink too much, but there aint nothin' wrong wid his drinkin' a little bit. Ah agress wid you. (His convenient memory was working again) Ah always say that men is human, they must be persuaded by their own 'pinions. Paul says that. And mah 'pinions is that a man can drink sufficient, and thats all."
And with that, Moses had us by the arm ushering us off to a barroom that was four blocks away. "Ah recollects that you is a fine young man. You looks the part. What chirch does you b'long? No chirch? A sinner! You a sinner? Not you? Whew! (Very softly) Me too. You didn't know that. Did you? b'tween me and you Ah got a better chance being white then gittin’ in some of these churches er round hyar. Man, them people don't want me in them churches. Ah know the Lawd says all must. come, but not me. (He shook his head) The last time Ah was in a church Ah took an umbrella and slammed it right smack across the preacher's head. The sisters and the brothers got to honoring and b'fo Ah knowed it Ah was whuppin’ up the whole church. Ah'm a fightin' sonofabitch when Ah gits mad. And nothin' makes me madder than a precher messin' er round wid a man's wife. Son, jest lak you see me, mah liquor makes me do some awful things. And mah liquor aint made me do nothin' wrong yet. ('We're still on our way to the barroom) This walkin' aint too good fo' me but you sho got to walk to git a drink, aint you? No indeed. Them people aint goin' to let me jine them churches. You know what they say? As soon as the preachers ask fo' members they say 'not him, Lawd, not him.' That makes me mad. Ah walk out, cause if Ah stay in and they make me mad Ah'll break up the whole church. Ah don't know how that started. Ah'm jest as good a christian as any body else. When me arid mah wife was b'longin' to the Pleasant Hill Baptist Church on North Robertson Street we had an argument right in the church. She come tellin' me that Ah was drunk and Ah wasn't. We went on and on. Sho, the preacher was preachin'. But she wouldn't shut up, and fo’ Ah knows it Ah was hittin' her over the head and she started hollorin’. Them other wimmens was hollorin' too, sayin' 'aint it a shame?' Well, the preacher come breakin' at me, come tellin' me, 'old man, if you wasn't so old Ah would give you what you gave yo' wife.' Right there Ah let him hav a punch. B'fo Ah could looker round that preacher had a black eye. Some of them sisters says 'don't let Rev. hit that old man, he'll kill him.' Shucks, man, Rev. was goin’ the other way from me. That wasn't the first time that happens. Ah used to always break up them churches. Don't get me wrong. Ah aint no sinner, or nothin' lak that. Ah Jests fo'gits when Ah been drinkin'.
"How Ah got r'ligion is a long story. Ah was a young man. Man, Ah was a mess. Wouldn't hav nothin' to do with a woman less she puts it on the line, Ah means on the line. One woman gav me a hundred dollars and stood up and saw me drink it up, treatin' the house. That happens in Lexington my boy, whar Ah made mah manhood. Ah was born in Richmond, Virginia. Sho, mah parents was slaves. Ah done fo'got them. They dead when Ah was a baby. The white folks told me Ah had good parents. The white folks took care of me till Ah left. Ah was workin' on the farm. Do in' everything. You see Ah always wanted to travel. Used to hear 'them engines goin’ by tootin’ their whistles. Ah used to say all the time that Ah was goin’ one of them trains one of these days. Sho nough, Ah got to ridin' one of them. Ah rode the bootches but Ah rode. Went to Memphis and way south Mississippi, whar the women used to meet the riverbout mens. As Ah recollects, them wimmen aint never tried to give me no lemon….thats what you calls playin' a funny trick on you to git yo' money. They treated me right, cause jest lak Ah says, mah liquor makes me do funny things. Then agin, Ah always had mah. gat (pistol) which would shoot. All Ah had to do was pulled the trigger, thats all. Them prutty high yallar wimmens used to look At mah gat all the time and says, 'daddy, is you goin' kill me?' Ah says, baby, Ah'll kill you and yo' mammy, the woman that births you. They'd git jest as scared! Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin’you, them wimmens wouldn't mess wid me. Ah used to git plenty money. Work? Wasn't that work? You aint never been no pimp, Ah see that? If you think keepin’ up wid three and four wimmens aint no work boy you is got plenty to leran.
"Ah used to sing all of 'um a song that goes lak this!
Mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
Ah says mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
And move yo'self as thou wilt
Ah says, mamma, baby, slick back the quilt
Black gal, move yo'self as thou wilt.
"And boy, Ah had to hold on. Them gals in Mississippi, used to move like fast train out er Saint Looie, yea sir. You is lookin' at man who moved wid 'em, too.
"But Ah aint never finished tellin’ you how Ah got r'ligion. Psck. You know Ah done plum fo’got. (Which wasn't unexpected, we had reached the barroom, a dilapidated"joint" on the conner of Galvez and Poydras) Hyar is the place. Lets go inside. And don’t be buyin' no drinks for them people inside. The last gentman Ah brought hyar treated all them peple inside. B'fore Ah could git mah hand on the half pint them wimmens had it. Thats another thing. B'fore you go in Ah want to tell you not to pay any mind to Black Pearl. That gal can lie lak nobody's bisness. Aint never told the truth in her life. Cose, A man's got to be happy, so Ah got to put up wid her. But she's the lyin'est woman you ever laid eyes on. You'll see. (This looked like a warning, the kind that leads you to beleive that something would be pulled on the old man)
"How do you lak this place? (The place was smoky; a music box was playing slow blue tunes, and several women were shaking their posterior ina vain attempt to keep in time with the music. There were only five men in the place; some of them were looking at the show while others were drinking at the bar, paying no attention to it.) Its all right aint it? Ah knew you'd lak it. (Before we could seat ourselves Black Pearl was at our table. Her ruffled blue dress was mix switching from side to side; her white teeth were consiciiously showing out of red lips. Her kinky hair seemed to have been disturbed by a hot iron.) There you is Pearl. Let us alone. (Moses was very displeased because of Pearl's presence) Its gittin' so a man can't come into this place less he's crowded with you. (And Pearl resented this) Don't call me no bastard, Pearl."
But, Pearl wasn't paying him no mind; she went on calling Moses name, "Yeah, dig me, you old bastard. Dig me. You got company wid you and you want er be cute, eh?" Pearl was rather young to be "breaking down" but she was. Pearl is only about twenty-nine years old. She reiterated! "Dig me. But what you goin' to do when you git yo’ check. What you goin’ do?" Moses couldn't answere this; he felt like moving out of the place. He wouldn' say, but we thought This Pearl was too young to try "whupping." Poor old Moses was so embarrished that he couldn't sit down straight. "Give me a nickel so Ah can play some music," he said. Afterwhich Pearl chided! “Yeah, give him a nickel and let him play some mucie." With that she was off. Moses ordered two nickel whiskies and drank both of them. "Git me a half pint wine," he begged. That was finished very quickly, and Moses wiped his beard very carefully. He wouldn't do much talking; Moses wanted to think, to think about where Peral had gone and if she was coming back. "Thats a fool, thats what Ah calls a fool. You see when a woman acts lak that Ah got a mind to knock her damn head off. Yeah, Ah know Ah had a chance to do it. That slipped mah mind, Ah plum fo'got. Man is Ah mad?"
Moses ordered another whiskey. A fellow came over to the table and told him that Pearl said she would be back and she wasn't coming with out anything. Moses surmised again, but not about his philosophy. "Does you reckon that that gal got any sense?" He timidly asked, his voice whimpering and almost falling to pieces. And old man Moses was getting drunk. It may have been a convenient drunk, because Moses said, "Take me home and don't let anybody harm me." He stumbled and leaned to the side when he first attempted to move, drawing the attention of several persons who casted a dubious eye at us. One woman said very outspokenly, "Look, that young boy done made old man Moses drunk.” But our conscience was not whipped because we knew that Moses had one objective, and that was to get out of this place.
We-helped Moses out of place and along the street. The hisses we received were uncountable. Neatly everybody charged us with "makin’ old man Moses drunk." He wouldn't talk, just held his head down, droopingly. Finally, we got back to the spot where Moses was discovered. We very cautiously eat him on the steps, and tried to talk with him. Moses wouldn' say a mumbling word. Shortly, he was looking around, surveying everybody and everything. He peeped at us through one eye, and whispered, "Is she hyar?" When he heard the answer Moses was sober again. He wanted to talk again. "Man, that second drink got me, nearly knocked me out. Ah don't know what made so drunk. Must er been sumpin' Ah ate. No indeed. It wasn'y nothin' Ah hyared. No indeed! Let me tell you sumpin' son, Ah aint scared of a bastard or bitch born in this world, not a one. There aint nothin' to scare Moses Alexander. Ah done been through thick and thin. Ah done been through a bell of fire. Thats me, Moses Alexander. (A woman who resembled Black Pearl was coming up the street, and Moses Alexander stopped talking again. Whe he was positive the woman wasn't Pearl, he commenced rolling off words) See a man lak me? A man lak me will stand up and fight till he's dead dead. Yeah, twice dead!
"Well, you see Ah'm a christian and then Ah'm not. The scripture says a man is what he confesses to be. If you don't repent you aint goin' to hebbin. Sho? Ah want to go to hebbin. Aint Ah human? Ah sho don't want to go to hell. Cose, a man can go whar he pleases. All he's got to do is make it up in his mind. But Ah never makes that up in mah mind, Facts is, Ah never plains nothing. Ah lets the things happens as they wills. A man has to change in his hart; he is suppose to be qualified to git to hebbin. This runnin’ to church, prayln' and then comin' out messin' er round aint no kind of way to git to hebbin. Ah knows that!' Jest tryin' to tell a heap of people.
"You know son, the Lawd aint goin' to let no man be fooled. He's goin' to make ev’rything plain. The way shall be made so plain that, a fool can not mutter no excuse. You'll find that in the bible. If you don't understand He'll make clar. Ah knows that. You hyar people tackin' about the Bible. But them's the ones who knows not the Bible but ev' rybody's bisness. Me, Ah don't mess up in this and that. Ah aint got nothin' to do with that. Ev'ry tub got to sit on its own bottom, and if its bottom aint no good that’s the Lawd’s bisness, not mie, not yo’s. That Ah recollects. Does you? Ah might hot be no christian lak the preachers say, but Ah can make it up the Highway. Oh yeah! Thats the way Ah plains to mahself. If Ah was goin' to be hung tomorrow Ah would say it jest lak that. They would say, well, that man plians it the best way he knows how."
Now, all of the pride that was about old man Moses was leaving him; some fellow interupted our conversation to say that black Pearl said that Moses wanted to be cute because he had one of them "high caflutin’ friends of his wid him," but that "she was goin' to show him." Yes, old man Moses was a different man now. He need sympathy. His voice broke like a tired woman; he could hardly talk. The fellow admitted that Moses was a good man; that he would fight women or anybody else, but that black Pearl was the only one who would have anything to do with him when he, had money to pay for what he wanted. And so, "What can you do when you is whupped?!' Moses pitifully asked, suggesting, "Mister, you better go, b'cause if Pearl comes and finds you hyar she is goin' to beat mah black ass." However, he managed to admit, but hurriedly, "Sho, Ah got religion."
2918 Gravier St.
Theodore Bricks
Interviewed 3/8/39
Submitted 3/17/39
"RELIGION IN DE DREAMS."
"Son, Ah aint so well, Ah got a heap of sumpin' hurtin' me. When Ah walk too much mah side hurt me, when Ah sit down too much mah back hurt me. Ah'm jest hurtin', thats all." This is Samuel Jenkins talking, and he likes to talk. Somehow, when he talks too much nothing hurts him.
Samuel is seventy-six years old. He was born in Algiers or “somewhar over that way." His friends call him Sam for short. He is a six footer of black color and knappy hair; Sam has lots of personality and lots of wisdom. "Its mah wisdom that keeps me goin," he states, grinning and bowing like a stage comedian receiving an applause.
"It was a funny thing how Ah got religion," Sam says. "Ah went along a long time. Ah wasn't studyin' er bout de Lawd. In dem days Ah was raisin plenty kane. Ah was young den, used to try de wimmens. Can't try dem now cause mah rheumatism aint goin' let me do it. Ah keeps thinkin' but can't seem to do no mo'. When Ah sits down and think over days when Ah was younger and used to gyrate, wimmens Ah gits mah kicks. Boy, Ah was a mess! Shucks, Ah aint had no time to pray den. Sho, Ah used to hyar people talkin' er bout de Lawd, used to hyar dem sayin' dat dey saw de Lawd and He told dem so and so. Aint nobody told me no so and so den; so Ah went right along. Jest lak Ah'm tellin' you Ah used to be a mess! What Ah had to offer? Man, Ah had appeal, dats what. Aint you never hyar people say dey had appeal? Well, dats what Ah had. Ah used to be a sharp lookin' dude jest lak you see me. When Ah walked down de street everybody looked around. You ever hyared people say when de wagon comes everybody goes? Well, Ah was de wagon...and everybody went. On a Saturday nite Ah used to walk into dem jints and whupped up a breeze, used to make wimmens jump naked. Ah don't mean jump naked Ah mean kick up a breeze, you know. Paid de pinana player fifty cents and let him beat on his box till somebody hit de floor. Man, you should er seen dem wimmens dance. Used to do de Eagle Hock. One old broad used to stick her BUTT so high in de air people thought it was a lamp post. Man, dat gal was black but she sho had a twang. When she started dancin' all dem yallar wimmens could do nothin’ but stop and look, Dey used to try and shake like Black Martha but dere wasn't nothin' doin’, no indeed, Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you, Ah r'member one time when Gibb's Place was full of people, people on top of de pianano, people on top of de chairs, on de bar, everywaar. And everyone of dem people came to see Black Martha dance against Lulu White, she was a brownskin. Martha didn't lak brownskin wimmens no how. I Used to say that dey wasn't colored people, dey was Indians. Well, deye was so many Indians over dere you couldn't tell de difference. Well, anyhow neither one of dem started dancin’ till de music got hot. Old Jack Anderson was beatin’ on de pianano, Tom Vield was on de drums and Percy Gates was on de banjo. We used to call Percy plug ugly. He was some ugly. He won the ugly man contest we put on one time, and his face was shaped lak a plug, thats why we called him plug ugly, Ha-he-ha-he! His old lady was ugly too. We used to call her Pigeon cause she had pigeon toes and ears lak a pigeon nose. She was black too.
"Whenever Ah talks er bout dem people Ah thinks about Hazel Brown. Now, dat was some woman. When she walked frontward she looked lak she was walk-in' backwards. You couldn't tell de difference. If it hadn't been for her face dere was no way to tell de difference. Why? Man, Hazel was shaped in de front lak she was shaped in de back. She had a BUTT that was big and she had a Bust that was big. One was as big as de other. When she'd BUTT she'd BUST and when she'd BUST she'd BUTT, So dere. Has you ever been on de flyin’ horsos? Well, ridin' Hazel was jest lak ridin’ de flyin' horses. You hyared talkin’ er bout Sunshine Money makin' de loop de loop? Thats de way you went when you rode Hazel!" Sam is doing a lot of "jump-talking;" now he is speaking about something else! "Take Jim Jenkins, mah cousin. What did he do when Sam Boyer bet him five dollars that he couldn't drink two quarts of whiskey. He got him a a quart bottle of olive oil and drank that on down. Ha-he-ha! Man, that oil messed er round and did the wrong thing. When that oil got finished with Sam he couldn't drink a drop of that whiskey, Ha! It was a long time b'fo he could drink too. That oil was workin', and workin' real fast. Everytime you looked er round Sam was er goin’. He aint fooled wid no oil since that time neither.
"Gittin’ back to Black Martha. Black Martha would do a thing till she had done drunk two full quarts. Ah mean full quarts. That gal didn't drip a drop. When she finished each drip she was ready to drop another drip. Anyhow, she drank her belly and her mind full. Then the music got to playin' and she got to dancin'. She was doin' the Eagle Rook and the Belly Twister, Everytime she twisted her belly some poor man went wrong. Did Ah go wrong? Man, git away from hyar! Anyhow, she was jest er dancin' and movin' er round the floor. Never-mind Alice said 'Shake that thing' and Black Martha got down to the floor and whizzed herself. Ah was standin' right over her, jest lak Ah'm sayin', standin'nright over her. Boy, that was yars ago. That was when the mules was pullin the street ears. Well, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you. We was all in this place havin' a good time, lookin' at them fool wimmens dance and shake themselfs. We was drinkin' too, jest lak Ah'm tellin’ you. When Black Martha finished her dancin' she went on upstairs wid a man. Shucks dere wasn't no contest. Lulu couldn't dance wid Black Martha. Lulu was a-sweatin’ and beckin' and Black Martha was cool as Apple Cider. She wasn't even sweatin' or nuthin’. De railroads mens used to sing her dis song:
Black Martha, is cool and cold
Black Martha, is cool and cold
Her skin is black but her butt is gold.
When you see Martha comin' along
Ah say when you see Martha comin' along
Her meat is rockin' and she's smellin' strong.
Dere is sumpin' er bout Martha Ah can't stand
Black gal, Martha, Ah can't understand
Why she's got so many diffrent mens.
If yo’ bottle is full and yo’ pipe is dry
If yo’ bottle is ful and yo’ pipe is dry
Be sho and git near Black Martha's thighs.
Black Martha can dance, can shake too
Ah say, Martha can dance and shake too
If you want to git well let her put her stuff on you.
Went down to de pool room saw what the boys was doin'
Went down to see what de boys was dpin
But Martha was wid ‘em, and dey all was screwing.'
"Everybody used to sing and dance that number. De guitar player used to be de furst one to start it. He’d git up on de chair and sing away. We was all singin' that number on de day Ah'm tellin' you er bout.
"Man, jest lak Ah'm tellin' you, that was a day. A day Ah'll never fo'git it. Ah's been a rascal. Messed wid all de wimmens in every town Ah got in. Even knocked down windows and pulled open doors to git to mah wimmens. But, man. My goodness! When de fun was goin’ on and all of us was doin’ all rite. De Sun was hot and de clouds was all pushed b'hind each other. And all of a sudden. A black man come in upon us. Ah can see him now. That man had on a black suit wid large white buttons. He was a kind of a funny fellow, too. His ears was long like his hands. Ah aint lyin' no! His eyes was small like his head, and his teeth was white like his buttons. His hair was ruft lak his skin. But he was smilin' like he had sumpin' up his sleeves. Its a good thing that man didn't come in when Black Martha was dancin’. Would he went too? No indeel Wait till you know why! Some of dem fellows don't know why yet.
"Some of de fellows had done left Black Martha and was sittin' er round playin' cards. Some of um was drinkin', and some of um was jest sittin' er round doln' nuthin'. That man, nobody knew his name, jest came in. Furst, he went to de bar and looked at de bar-tender, and den he walked er round de place ina circle like he was a flyin' mill or sumpin'. You see, Ah had done been all over Algiers and down, whar cut Off is now, and Ah had done been er round too. Ah aint never seen nuthin' lak that, and Ah aint never hyared of a man like this man. Wait till Ah tell you er bout him. He looked at me a long time, Man, is you crazy? Dere wasn't nobody who was goin' to mess wid dat man. Dats it, nobody paid him any mind at furst, jest let him be himself .He was himself too. Went to de gamblin' table and took a seat. Ah can't r'member what kind of a game the boys was playin’ but dey was playin' cards. Now, Peter Woods was a' card player. That man could cheat and outbeat anybody playin’ cards. He used to win all de money. Black Martha could play too. When that man sat down at de table and pulled out his money everybody sat down who had a dime. Black Martha sat next to him and tried to peek in his hand. She was playin’ partners wid Pete. Wait till Ah tell you! The card game got on. People started comin' er round lookin'. Ahbwas standin' right whar Ah could see everything, even gave Black Martha money to bet. Ah wasn't missin' a thing. Ah figures that that man was new and dey was goin' to sho give him a good lickin’. But, wait till Ah tell you! Shucks, Ah told um don't worry when that man won two straight bets, and went on dancin' wid one of dem wimmens. Den, after a while, the man got losin', and he started callin' on de Lawd. Everybody laughed, and relaughed, but he kept callin on de Lawd. Now, that was sumpin' that aint nobody ever hyared er bout, people callin' on de Lawd in a gamblin’ house. All of us was sinners. Dere wasn't a man in de house who, had been to church in ten yars, Ah'd dare say. Ah know Ah'd not been dere in that time, wasn't even thinkin' er bout it. Everybody else was de same way, Ah know. Well, the man kept callin' on de Lawd, and he’d win every bet. Somebody asked him was he a preacher and he wouldn't answer on that. Black Martha got to hollowin' and goin' on, screamin', 'Dis hyar man must be a preacher. He’s callin’ on de Lawd, and Ah been pushin’ myself on him but he won't even wither. Sump in's wrong. Dere aint no gamblin' man who gambles and calls on de Lawd at de same time.' Den, we got to laughin’. agin'. Little Willie says, 'Let de brother call fo’ anybody he wants to. That bastard done got mah money and Ah'm goin’ start callin' on his black ass if he don't function wid some of that money.' Then de brother got mad, real mad, Fo' de furst time the brother was mad; his eyes come poppin'n out his head and his black ears got red. He was mad, cause he says, ‘Now, fellows Ah'm hyar fo’ a good time not trouble. Ah don't want it. Don't curse me or infront of me.’ Den, Black Martha started laughin', she says, 'Dats funny. Don't curse! Well, you old black bastard!' And man, wid dat the man tunned er round and looked at Black Martha, jest looked at her, and she fell to de floor, in a faint. You could er hyared a pin drop. Nobody was sayin'muthin, not even me. Nobody was sayin' nuthin' neither! Nobody could move from de table, dey was sit struck. Ah was dumbfounded fo' ture. People was er round Black Martha wid salt, wid black pepper and all sorts of stuff, tryin' to bring her back. Nuthin’ could do no good. The man wasn't payin’ no tention to her. He was back at de table foolin’ er round wid Cards. Den, all of a sudden, Black Martha came back! She was like somebody crazy; her eyes was rollin' like she rolls her belly. Her hair was standin' straight up, she was foamin' at de mouth, and cryin' a lil bit, Martha threw her a arms up and was stiff. Everybody rushed over to her and held her tight. But the man didn't pay any attention to her. That was funny. Den, Martha started lookin' er round lak she was lookin' fo' somebody. Her eyes was gittin' whiteer and whiter, she was makin' funny movements, like when you is in a daze or sumpin' Den, she started hollowin', ‘whar is that man. Let me to that man! That man is a, Gawd sent man. He sent me a-dreamin’. Ah went straight to hebbin...to hebbin. Ah saw that man in hebbin. He came in jest liked he did when he.came in hyar. But, in hebbin he had a cigar in his mouth, and a red tie on. He was always talkin' wid Saint Peter, And dem Christian people say that Saint Peter is de man you got to do bisness wid. Ah dreampt that that man told Saint Peter er bout us...he called all our names. Mine was called from a long list of names. It was on a piece of white paper. Dem angels was all er round lookin' at dat list. Ah hyared one of dem angels say that he was goin’ to take Beaulah Mite. Den dey startin’ arguin' er bout me. One says no and one says yes. De no's won out and de yes's says dey was goin’ to try and git me anyhow. That man was dere arguin’ to; he was talkin' wid Saint Peter. Him and Saint Peter had dere heads t'gother. And Ah hyared, Ah don't need nobody to tell me nuthin', Ah hyared him say that he didn't want to harm nobody, but he didn't want nobody to curse him. Den, Saint Peter says it was all rite. And it was all rite. Cause bells startin' ringin', and horns startin' blowin’. It was like the end of time. Angels and Saints was comin' to me. Ah aint goin' lie, Ah didn't see de Lawd but Ah saw a big image comin' b'fo' me. It must er been Him cause dere was a large crowd er round Him. Ah saw that man er round him to. Somebody up dere was comin' to me, to put one of dem wings on me. But, Ah woke up. Lawd, Ah’m sho is glad Ah woke up!’
“And jest lak Ah'm tellin' you standin' hyar. That man came over to Black Martha and put his hand on her head and she was better den and dere, like nuthin' never even happened. He jest stood dere lookin' and starin' like he wanted to say sumpin' but he didn't want to say nuthin', Dere wasn't nuthin' fo' him to say. He'd done done his mission fine. Black Martha says, 'Ah don't know er bout y'all but Ah'm goin' git me some r'ligion somewhar from somebody.' Man, Ah saw all that. Ah stood right b'fo everybody and saw all dat. Maybe Black Martha had a funny way to git her r'ligion, but Ah was sho wid her. That man, we never did know his dissapeared out of dat place like this. He went right out! And de last thing he told me was, 'Fo' all you is worth, and all you can, git you'self some r'ligion.' And don't you know Mister that Ah got me some r'ligion too. Me and Black Mactha and all de rest of us who was dere and saw what happened got some r'ligion. We got our r'ligion rite away. Dere wasn't no need to waitin'. Cause Black Martha saw hebbin. And Ah know dat if dem aflgels had er took Black Martha dey was sho goin' to take me too. Den agin, if Black Martha had er gone she'd soon come and git me. Dat Ah know cause she sho did like me, and dat Ah know.
"Yes indeed! We all got r'ligion at the Mount Moriath Baptist Church t'gother. We all got in de water t'gether, told our stories and determination t'gether. It was a decorporation and a complete understandin’ between us and de preacher. He said he had had a dream er bout dat man who came into de gamblin’ place and he told him dat we was comin’ Man, Ah don't know what you calls dat but Ah calls it r'ligion in de dream!"
Marie Brown
1909 Gen Ogden St.
Interviewed 3/21/39
Submit tea 3/31/39
"SINNING FOR SECRITY.”
"Give me that old-time religion
Give me that old-time religion
Give me that old-time religion
Its good enough for me.
It was good for my old pappy
It was good for my old pappy
It was good for my old pappy
Its good enough for me.
It was good for my old mammy
It was good for my old mammy
It was good for my old mammy
Its good enough for me."
This hymn isn't exactly the them song of Sister Marie Brown, a happy, dark religious child, but she sings it all the time, mainly because, "this new religion is so streamlined that you' don't know if you is prayin’ to the Lawd or to the preacher.” Marie had been a christian nearly all of her sixty years. Of course, she has "backalided" like other christians, but it was only in the mind; she says," there I was thinking like I always do. And I figures that everything is in the mind, aint it? Alright, take the other day. Didn't I want to take a drink. I took it. My mind says I didn't feel it, so I took so more. Then I took some more, for I knowed it I was dead drank. Then, I makes up my mind that I aint drunk, and I starts to drink some more, cause my mind says I aint drank. Then, I gets drank for true. Now, if I didn't listen to my mind I wouldn't er got drank." And, "Thats the way religion is, your minds gets you and there you is.” Marie took a comfortable seat in her rocking-chair upon completing this last charge, urging," just git yourself tired up in your church and your mind takes you away, plum away. I always say your mind is like a sailor, it likes to travel. Sometimes it takes me to Africa.
"I came hyar from De Ridder about twenty yars ago. Sometimes I ask myself why I came hyar, cause I was doing all right in De Ridder. I was working on the farm, cose I wasn't making much money, but I was doing all right. Sho, I was a christian then. Let me tell you, when I furst opened my eyes on glorified day I was a christian. My ma and my pa ahead of mewas christians. They was members of the One Light Baptist Church. Why they calls it One Light Baptist Church? Cause the church only had one light, thats all. But, one, two or three lights, the Lawd came to it just the same. He would sing ' Give Me That Old Time Religion.’ Anyhow, whats the light got to do with your religion? Aint religion light? The Bible says so. Sometimes the Bible is mis-quoted, but not about light. Even when our lamp used to go out we had still had the Lawd Ha-he! That reminds me, all of us hollowed 'the light done gone out,' but Henry Jones says, 'thats nothing, the Lawd is in our church.' Then Napoleon Jackson says, the Lawd no thin' some nigger's hand is in my pocket.’ Talking about a scuffle, man that was some scuff le! People commenced talking about if anybody's hand is in my pocket its coming up a nubb! Shucks, I sat down on my money. And do you know that somebody tried to get my money. Old Rev. Kept pounding on his Bible, asking for the lights but the lights aint never came on. Man, we had to run out of church. So, Old Rev. stopped that kind of staff, he got him one of them great big tights and stack it up by him on the pulpit; got him three big lights for the congregation, was sho pisitve that no more lights was going out, no indeed! But, they aint never changed the name of the church. My pa used to say all the time that they ought-a change them lights and get oil, but the people was scared that oil might set the church on fire, and there it would be! So, we didn't argue about no light, we just went a-head and satisfied oursolves with one light, and had oar services.
"Another time, I went to Sister Brooks'- house and told her that it was a shame that the collections was so small, but she didn't say nothing but that it was due to the lights. You see, nobody could see the basket plain enough. Them collectors used to always complain that they couldn't tell what was being dropped in the basket, it was hard to tell when the dime, nickels and pennies was being dropped. Old lady "Lulu used to say all the time that heaven was light and she saw no reason why there wasn't no light in the church. No, aint none of them lights failed much, but they did fail. No, we aint stop going to church cause the services was good. Our preacher sho could preach. His name was Paul Rivers. He was long and tall; And could that rascal preach! Man, old Bev. used to stand on the pulpit and open his big mouth; he used to dig in the Bible like a man digs in the ground with a pitchfork. Everytime he came up them sinners used to fall out. Talking ah out fried chicken, man, them sisters told old Rev. ‘knock me out and get chicken.' Well, there wasn't no need talking that old Rev. couldn't preach, he could lay it. Take the time he had baptism in the river. Old Rev. said he was going to get him some sinners. He went down to the river and looked at the water, told the water to hash cause he had words to speak. And do you know that the waters hashed? Them waters stopped just as dead as dead! Even looked act up at old Rev. He got to preaching! 'Breathern and sisterern, hyar I'm, standing on the rock of ages, standing hyar and looking direct into the space of hemiphere and glory, asking to be hyared so a message can be both understood and relayed to the four corners of the world. Help me, and untask me so that I can preach this gospel.’ Yes suh, old Rev. had some preaching bility. He could make people fall in the water. I fell in there, when I went to See the baptism of my uncle Jake. I couldn't swim but the spirit lifted me out of the water, and my body was dry like my soul. It was dry with the blessing of the Lawd. Old Rev. kept on saying, 'Taking my text from the first end of Jerimiah to the last of David. David said, 'speak not maliciously of no one unless that someone falls prey to wrong. It makes no sense? In other words, we must not speak less we know of who we speak, and that person must he in bad shape, in other words in a wreckless state, and is such a bad thing in the community that talk won't hurt. Thats why old Rev. used to talk on 'Sinning for security all the time.’nCose, I aint never done it, bat old Rev. was talking about a gal named Helen. She used to sin for security. Old Rev. used go talk about her all the time. I used to wonder why he talked so much about Helen. But, I found out that he tried to sin with Helen but he aint had no security. And she wasn't going for the fun of it. so, old Rev. said he was going to make her get religion, cause it was a sin and a shame the way Helen was knocking the church business away from the deacons' board. Before every deacon paid his church dues he was paying his dues to Helen. Old Rev. would take for his text all the verses of David, and talk straight to the people, 'Must we sin? Must we? I sn't it a fact that sins puts us in the middle of the devil's door? Aint it a fact that sins offers us no real security? because sins tells us that we is when we aint. Somttimes we feel lak we is enjoying something, but we aint. We is just sitting, thats all. Facts, David says we must not sins leas the lions of the woods grabs us by our throuts and tie as down to make as sin. Is you asking when is that? That is...well, I can't explain that. It aint lak me to talk that kind of talk, is it? I'm a lady. Then again, I don't know techinally when that is. I'M only thinking. You can be wrong in your thinking, you know. Anyway old Rev. used to say when womens get so they aint got no respect for the ways mens agree on them. they aint got no rights to be respected. But, Helen didn't care, she went on and got plenty security. Used to say all the time a, 'aint the lights in the church going out all the time? If them lights can go out why not mine? Lights is lights. Aint nobody ever said nothing about. lights in the church going out, is they?' That was a question that nobody could answer. I used to try and figure that out myself, but I couldn't do it for nothing in the world. Old Rev. used to look at Helen, she was some brownskln gal, and shake his head. 'Let him preach about sinning for security all he wants, but if It wasn't for that church what security would he have?' She used to say. And don't you know that that was fact, if it wasn't for that church what would he do. Cose, myself I was a christian, and I wasn't never going to say nothing about Helen. My mammy used to tell me all the time to never say nothing about Helen. Cause as she, long as she wasn't taking my pa it was all right with us. It was strange thing my pa never stand Helen. No, I don't know why he didn't lak her. I don't reckon that it was because there was anything between them, neither. My pa was just a straight-up old man, thats all. He went straight. I know cause he supported the church; used to give old Rev. vegatables. He had that old time religion, and plenty of it.
"Take the lights and Helen and Jim Bailey. All of them was bad Jim Bailey was an old rascal too. He used to work on the railroads and bay womens all the nice things. Bat they way he didn't pest them was a shame. Jim used to pick the womens up and out right out of church. Used to always say, 'if they can shout they can jump, and if they can jump they can squall lak a pig, and I lak a pig what can squel lak a pig.’ That One Light Baptist Church was a mess! Old Rev. used to say all the time, 'church aint a place for the wealthy and the people who want to have fun, its a place? for righteousness and uplifting souls.’ I don't know if that was right or not, I'm a christian and it aint my place to know that. Not that I'm no doubting Thomas or nothing. He did all his talking, but if he could help Hein sin for security he would er done son long ago. That goes for all them preachers, make no difference where they is. I'm a christian. But, I done dipped my nose into that long ago. How I got religion? I don't know, but I sho beleives that my ma and pa gave it to me before I was born. Cause I came hyar talking about the Lawd, they Bays. Aint it right that I should stay a christian. I always sing that old time religion, it keeps me from getting a-hold to the new kind. The kind that gives you all preacher and no Gawd. Me, I’m sho going to protect myself from the devil by singing my hymn and minding my business. Me, I don't know nothing on nobody!”
Marie Brown
1909 Gen Ogden St.
Interviewed 3/21/39
Submitted 3/31/39
"SINNING FOR SECURITY."
"Give me that old-time religion
Give me that old-time religion
Give, me that old-time religion
Its good, enough for me.
It was good for my old pappy
It was good for my old pappy
It was good for my old pappy
Its good enough for me.
It was good for my old mammy
It was good for my old mammy
It was good for my old mammy
Its good enough for me.
This hymn isn't exactly the theme song of Sister Marie Brown, a happy, dark religious child, but she sings it all the time, mainly because, "this new religion is so streamlined that you don't know if you is prayin’ to the Lawd or to the preacher,” Marie had been a christian nearly all of her sixty years. Of course, she has "backslided” like other christians, but it was only in the mind; she says," there I was thinking like I always do. And I figures that everything is in the mind, aint it? Alright, take the other day. Didn't I want to take a drink. I took it. My mind says I didn't feel it, so I took so more, Then I took some more, for I knowed it I was dead drunk. Then, I makes up my mind that I aint drunk, and I starts to drink some more, cause my mind says I aint drunk. Then, I gets drunk for true. Now, if I didn't listen to my mind I wouldn't er got drunk." And, "Thats the way religion is, your minds gets you and there you is." Marie took a comfortable seat in her rocking-chair upon completing this last charge, urging," just git yourself tired up in your church and your mind takes you away, plum away. I always say your mind is like a sailor, it likes to travel. Sometimes it takes me to Africa.
"I came hyar from De Ridder about twenty yars ago. Sometimes I ask myself why I came hyar, cause I was doing all right in De Ridder. I was working on the farm, cose I wasn't making much money, but I was doing all right. Sho, I was a christian then. Let me tell you, when I furst opened my eyes on glorified day I was a christian. My ma and my pa ahead of me was christians. They was members of the One Light Baptist Church. Why they calls it One Light Baptist Church? Cause the church only had one light, thats all. But, one, two or three lights, the Lawd came to it just the same. He would sing Give Me That Old Time Religion,’ Anyhow, whats the light got to do with your religion? Aint religion light? The Bible says so. Sometimes the Bible is mis-quoted, "but not about light. Even when our lamp used to go out we had still had the Lawd. Ha-ha! That reminds me, all of us hollowed 'the light done gone out,' but Henry Jones says, 'thats nothing, the Lawd is in our church.' Then Napoleon Jackson says, 'the Lawd nothin’ some nigger's hand is in my pocket.' Talking about a scuffle, man that was some scuffle! People commenced talking about if anybody's hand is in my pocket its coming up a nubb! Shucks, I sat down on my money. And 'do you know that somebody tried to get my money. Old Rev. Kept pounding on his Bible, asking for the lights but the lights aint never oame on. Man, we had to run out of church. So, Old Rev. stopped that kind of stuff, he got him one of them great big lights and stuck it up by him on the pulpit; got him three big lights for the congregation, was she pisitve that no more lights was going out, no indeed! But, they aint never changed the name of the church. My pa used to say all the time that they ought-a change them lights and get oil, but the people was soared that oil might set the church on fire; and there it would be! So, we didn't argue about no light, we just went a-head and satisfied ourselves with one light, and had our services.
"Another time, I went to Sister Brooks' house and told her that it was a shame that the collections was so small, but she didn't say nothing but that it was due to the lights. you see, nobody could see the basket plain enough. Them collectors used to always complain that they couldn't tell what was being dropped in the basket, it was hard to tell when the dimes, nickels and pennies was being dropped. Old lady Lulu used to say all the time that heaven was light and she saw no reason why there wasn't no light in the church. No, aint none of them lights failed much, but they did fail. No, we aint stop going to church cause the services was good. Our preacher she could preach. His name was Paul Rivers. He was long and tall; And could that rascal preach! Man, old Rev. used to stand on the pulpit and open, his big mouth; he used to dig in the Bible like a man digs in the ground with a pitchfork. Every time he came up them sinners used to fall out. Talking ah out fried chicken, man, them sisters told old Rev. 'knock me out and get chicken.' Well, there wasn't no need talking that old Rev. couldn't preach, he could lay it. Take the time he had baptism in the river. Old Rev. said he was going to get him some sinners. He went down to the river and looked at the water, told the water to hash cause he had words to speak. And do you know that the waters hashed? Them waters stopped just as dead as dead! Even looked up at old Rev. He got to preaching! 'Breathern and sisterern, hyar I'm, standing on the rock of ages, standing hyar and looking direct Into the space of hemiphere and glory, asking to be hyared so a message can be both understood and relayed to the four corners of the world. Help me, and untask me so that I can preach this gospel. Yes suh, old Rev. had some preaching 'bility. He could make people fall in the water. I fell in there when I went to see the "baptism of my uncle Jake. I couldn't swim but the spirit lifted ma out of the water, and my body was dry like my soul. It, was dry with the blessing of the Lawd. Old Rev. kept on saying, 'Taking my text from the first end of Jerimiah to the last of David. David said, 'speak not maliciously of no one unless that someone falls prey to wrong. It makes no sense? In other words, we must not speak less we know of who we speak, and that person must be in bad shape, in other words in a wreckless state, and is such a bad thing in the community that talk won't hart. Thats why old Rev. used to talk on 'Sinning for security all the time.'nCose, I aint never done it, but old Rev. was talking about a gal named Helen. She used to sin for security. Old Rev. used to talk about her all the time. I used to wonder why he talked so much about Helen. But, I found out that he tried to sin with Helen but he aint had no security. And she wasn't going for the fun of it. So, old Rev. said he was going to make her get religion, cause it was a sin and a shame the way Helen was knocking the church business away from the deacons' board. Before every deacon paid his church dues he was paying his dues to Helen. Old Rev. would take for his text all the verses of David, and talk straight to the people, 'Must we sin? Must we? Isn't s it a fact that sins puts us in the middle of the devil's door? Aint it a fact that sins offers us no real security? because sins tells us that we is when we aint. Somttimes we feel lak we is enjoying something, but we aint. We is just sining, thats all. Facts, David says we must not sin less the lions of the woods grabs us by our throats and tie us down to make us sin.' Is you asking when is that? That is...well, I can't explain that. It aint lak me to talk that kind of talk, is it? I'm a lady. Then again, I don't know techinally when that is. I'M only thinking. You can he wrong in your thinking, you know. Anyway, old Rev. used to say when womens get so they aint got no respect for the ways mens agree on them, they aint got no rights to be respected. But, Helen didn't care, she went on and got plenty security. Used to say all the times, 'aint the lights in the church going out all the time? If them lights can go out why not mine? Lights is lights. Aint nobody ever said nothing about lights in the church going out, is they?’ That was a question that nobody could answer. I used to try and figure that out myself, but I couldn't do it for nothing in the world. Old Rev. used to look at Helen, she was some brownskin gal, and shake hisnhead. 'Let him preach about sinning for security all he wants, but if it wasn't for that church what security would he have?' She used to say. And don't you know that that was a fact, if it wasn't for that church what would he do. Cose, myself I was a christian, and I wasn' never going to say nothing about Helen. My mammy used to tell me all the time to never say nothing about Helen. Cause as she long as she wasn't taking my pa itvwas all right with us. It was strange thing my pa never stand Helen. Not, I don't know why he didn't lak her. I don't reckon that it was because there was anything between them, neither. My pa was just a straight-up old man, thats all. He went straight. I know cause he supported the church; used to give old Rev. vegatables. He had that old time religion, and plenty of it.
"Take the lights and Helen and Jim Bailey. All of them was bad. Jim Bailey was an old rascal too. He used to work on the railroads and buy womens all the nice things. But they way he didn't pest them was a shame. Jim used to pick the womens up and out right out of church. Used to always say, 'if they can shout they can jump, and if they can jump they can squall lak a pig, and I lak a pig what can equal lak a pig.’ that One Light Baptist Church was a mess! Old Rev. used to say all the time, 'Church aint a place for the wealthy and the people who want to have fun, its a place for righteousness and uplifting souls.’ I don't know if that was right or not, I'm a christian and it aint my plaoe to know that. Not that I'm no doubting Thomas or nothing. He did all his talking, but if he could help Hein sin for security he would er done son long ago. That goes for all them preachers, make no difference where they is. I'm a christian. But, I done dipped my nose into that long ago. How I got religion? I don't know, but I she beleives that my ma and pa gave it to me before I was born. Cause I came hyar talking about the Lawd, they says it right that I should stay a christian. I always sing that old time religion, it keeps me from getting a-hold to the new kind. The kind that gives you all preacher and no Gawd. Me, I’m she going to protect myself from the devil by singing my hymn and minding my business. Me, I don't know nothing on nobody!"
Name----------------Moriath Butler
Address----------------7418 Garfield St.
Interviewed-----------------2/14/39
Submitted------------------2/18/39
Number of words------------------1,730
"HOW I GOT RELIGION"
Moriath Butler doesn't like to talk about religion, as a rule. In fact, she doesn't like to talk about anything. Religious conversations saden her heart and recall unhappy incidents with husband, Paul Butler, who is dead but not forgotten. You see, Paul Butler was a "rock bottom" sinner man; Moriath had to pray for him night and day, but unappreciatlvely, because Paul use to always say, "aint no need you praying for me. I done seen the Lord and He said I'm bound to go to hell." Paul liked women and wine like the monkey likes cocoanut. "He's the one who put these wrinkles on my face long fo' I was an old woman," Moriath says. "My face is wrinkled like a dirty dish towel." And that is the truth.
Moriath is a black, mammy-type woman, she wears a black head piece most, of the time. She is arrogant with strangers and submissive with friends. Moriath likes to sing spirituals when she is lonely and go to church when she is happy, or contented. "Never go to church less you is contented, because if you don't the devil will sho git your mind, and there you is," Moriath claims. Hardly will anyone think that Moriath is seventy-eight years old."Yes, I'm seventy-eight years old. You know, when Paul was doing his fooling around I was laying low preserving my health. He's gone and I'm still here...preserving my health."
"Little do I talk. I got to talk with the Lord. Aint no need of me wasting the Lord's time," Moriath will tell you. "Thats precious time and it aint to be wasted. No indeed! Thats the trouble with the world today, people taking the Lord's time wasting it. What you think is the matter in Europe? What you think is the matter in Germany? The people's wasting the Lord's time, thats what. Never you mind about the way Hitler is treating them Jews. They is God people too. And the Lord is going to take care. Hitler can go on wasting his time mistreating people, killing and robbing them, but the Lord is going to stick his head out of one of them black, monsterating skies and blow Hitler plum to hell. And the Lord is going to take that chip off of Mussalini's shoulder. He wants somebody to take it off, well the Lord is going to take it off. Because he was wasting time he thought of poor Ethiopia. You know what they say, an idle mind is the devil's work shop, thats what is the matter with all of them, but never you mind! Anyhow, what is all of them fignting for? They is fighting for England, thats what! And England is wasting the Lord's time too, thinking about poor Africa. England aint no good, like all the rest of them, fighting for poor Africa. They all want our country. Because Africa is got everything in the world. Gold, diamonds, coal, and everything. Now, to show you what an idle mind will do. Some fool thought of slavery...and bang. Here we comes. Right out of our home city and aint even considered. But, we is just as bad. We waste the Lord's time more than anybody else, we is good at that. Here we is right out of Africa and, gits no benefit out of it atall....I mean a tall. That gold and diamonds out of Africa is ours, we got business og gitting it. But what? We is got to pay for it, thats what. You think we should have to pay to go and see a circus, Lord, Lord. No, we aint got no business paying to see our own animals. Them elephants, camels, lions and all them animals you see belongs to us. They is from Africa, aint they? But you let us try to take ahem. My! My! I just don't understand this world, maybe the other one will be better. I hope so. Mens think about everything to wreck the world, not build it up.
"Me? I'm from Panooville, thats where. Born and raised there, worked in the fields when I was little. My Mammy worked in the fields. Yes, she was a slave. I reckon. Doggone it.....done forgot to play my gig. Sho, I play gigs. How you spects me to git along. You aint no Welfare is you? OH! Now you see? You is wasting time. Making me waste time. What? Sho, I worked from a.m. to p.m. Was it a mess? It was a double mess. Sho, I like the conntry. Wonder if that man is coming round here today. That lotry man, thats who! Got a nickel. Want to buy me some bacco. Thanks! You know Pancoville....its a little one horse town. My pa was named Henry and my ma was named Henrietta. Couldn't never understand that. One named Henry and the other Henrietta. Maybe they was kin. But they couldn't er been, heah? But, I always say that was my ma and pa business. And I aint the one to mess in people's business. I better not, my ma would kill me. It twastn't like it is today. Old folks wasn't letting you mess in their business like they do today, no indeed!
"The other day I drempt of nine, two and six. Thats a gig I been trying to catch for ever so many months. But I aint yet. Maybe I will, who knows?
"My ma er range my marriage with Paul I aint even knowed him. All she says was that he would make you a good husband cause he had was older than I was and had marrying on his mind. That nigger aint had no marrying on his mind. He had me on his mind. I was nice and dandy, like the summer flower, aint been plucked, aint been plucked stall. He use to see me running around looking good, and that bastard got to thinking. Went to my ma and told her a lot of things. You know in them days the mens had to got permission from your ma and pa fore they could marry you. It wasn't like it is today. No, he didn't go to my pa. He didn’t give a damn what happened. I aint never in my whole life seen a man as lazy as my pa. He wouldn't kill a hog, he wouldn't work out of season and sometimes he wouldn't even eat. My ma must loved that black rascal. Lord today. He was lazy. Cropped but when his whiskey had him so he was calling his mule Mister Joe, his boss. I remember one day Mister Joe hyared him saying, 'Git up hyar, Mister Joe. Lets plow this field, Mister Joe.' Ha! Man, Mister Joe went right strsight to him; he told him. 'Listen, you drunkard. If you don't stop calling that mule Mister Joe I'm going to crack your damn neck, thats what.' Man, that nigger got sober, right now! Another time Mister Joe cautght him pissing on his cotton. He told him, 'When you want to piss git you a hat and go down Main Street and pe pe in the hat infront of a drug store. You aint got no better sense.' And do you know that my pa got drunk and went walking down Main Street like Mister Joe said, and right infront all them people he pulled out his thing and started pissing. No, he was put in jail......he was thrown in jail and locked up for fifteen days. The Judge said that he was trying to Incite a pissing riot that might er broke in to a lynching riot if it don't be for Mister Joe's causin. He stopped him and pleaded his case. Mister Joe aint never told him what to do after that, not when he was drunk.
"Paul wouldn't pray, he wouldn't go to church, he wouldn't behave himself. Got bastard got children all over Pancoville and all over this town. He was just like my pa. Loved his whiskey. But, I didn't worry much, cause I preserved my health. See? He's dead and I'm still hyar enjoying the fruits of this land. I prayed for Paul, went to church. Used to be in the Isrealite Baptist Church every night. Paul used to say that I was having the preacher...fool. There I was praying for him, and he say I was having the preacher. What could I do with him? I aint had no friend who wanted him. And I sho aint had no fried chicken to give him. Cose, I found it funny that Reverend Charlie Hunter was always telling me that he wanted me to pray with him at his house. One time he took me way, way down a road in his buggy. Had the nerve to stop and come telling me to walk or else. If it wasn't because I hate to walk I'd beat the hell out of him. A man cracked him over the head with a broom for taking his wife in that old buggy of his. Married in his church. Man, Paul wouldn't marry me in no church. He just picked me and took me to a preacher friend of his. That old nigger was so anxious to git after me that he aint never said I do. I says to myself like this, what kind of a man is this. I was always saying that. Yes indeed, Paul Butler was a story book man. When he changed my name from Moriath Jones to Moriath Butler he changed my whole life. I aint never expected a man to do what he did. We almost had two children in one year. Is that going some? Shucks, if I had if left it to Paul, we would er had six in four years. That man must ate jack rabbitts the way he was running, must er ate them alive. Yea, we got seven children. Its a good thing Paul's back went bad, cause we would er had fourteen. Some people come saying that field men aint strong... them niggers is strong everywhere.
"I was never a doubting puson, me. I always knowed about the Lord. Cose I had to b'long to some church. When I was small I used to see spirits. They used to frighten me so. I used to see ghosts, spirits and natchall mens who was spirits. They would haunt me and stick shovels at me when I was sleeping. My ma says that was from I needed a man, but it was from hell. The devil used to send them spirits to me, I always did say. They left me when I got married, but I had religion when I got married. I can’t figure It. Yes. Them things used to come to me around twelve o'clock every night. Sometimes they would come looking like butterfllys and then they would change into ghosts, then they would change into mens without any heads. All of them, about ten of them. They used to come in tens. Sometimes they had fire in their mouths, pitchforks in their hands. I saw them, I'm telling you. I don't care what my ma said. She would come saying, 'shut up child, you better marry Paul. He'll run them spirits away.' I don't know. Cose I didn't close my eyes when I first got married, but on the next night I didn't see a spirit in the world. But I had been praying. Then I jined church. Went right up to the deacons when the pastor called the sinners. But I wasn't no sinners. Went rignt up to the deacons and told my d'termination. Told them that I was going to live for the Eord and that my body was white as soon, clean. What the Reverend said? Aint said nothing but Amen. That nigger knowed. He tried me. Cose he failed. Paul was the first. Whe I finished telling me d'termination I went to a stewardess' house and we had cake and ice-cream. Yes, that was in Pancoville. There was celebrations, plenty of them. I don't drink, I had lemonade. Can I remember how I got religion at first. Well, I wasn't in no really puzzled mind, I was asking the Lord questions about things, like anybody else. He wouldn't answer all the time, but He did His best.
"It was a bad day, the wind was the clouds was mean, a storm was in the air. Something came to me and told me to walk the tracks. And I wasn't looking for Paul, neither. Yes, he had a woman on the tracks. A high yaller. Well, I went walking the tracks. Had my head way up in the air, singing and thinking about the Lord, not wasting no time. Just thinking about the Lord. I was feeling good. I always say that maybe that was the day I first got religion. I always say. After I done got just a piece up the track I hyared a noise going sho..sho..sho..sho. I looked around and I aint seen no train. I kept on walking. Again I hyared a noise..going sho...sho...sho. I looked around and I aint seen no noise. Then something went woo..woo..woo. and woo..woo..woo..woo. I looked around and I says to myself, 'Moriath is that you?’ It wasn't me....so I kept on walking. I was singing I'M Heaven Bound. A chill passed o'fore me. It went WHISHT. I Jumped. I said, ‘Lord.' He answered 'Yes child.' Just like that. I says, 'Whats up?' He says, 'Plenty.' I started trembling. Cause that was the first time I ever talked direct with the Lord. I kept walking, I was scared stiff, my knees was trembling and my heart was going ‘a-bump-abump.' I led around and I aint seen nobody. Something this is a good time to talke with the Lord Moriath. Then that noise came again. Sho.sho. I says...to myself...where is that train. It went woo....woo...woo. Then I turned all around and I aint seen a train in the world. I stopped and I looked again. I made sure. Then the Lord says, 'Moriath. Thats me. When I said sho...all your troubles went. When I said Woo..woo..woe be to Him who mistreats you. I always say thats how I got real religion. You is looking at a woman who done hyared the voice of the Lord."
At this point, a man came by hollering, "Keno." For some very stnange reason Moriath forgot everything and scampered to the door. She had two nickels in her hand; she said, "Gimme, six, nine and four." The man dropped her coins in is bag and off he went. Moriath returned but she was in a far different mood. "Son, if them numbers come out I'm going git eighteen dollars." And of course, "that aint gambling. The Lord says he helps those who helps themselves." And further more, "in these trying times people is got to do something."
Moriath was very disturbed by the lottery man. She was through talking for the day; she was going to dream about "Them numbers." "You'll have to excuse me, son. I'm going pray for them numbers to come out. You come back some other time. Eighteen dollars will hep me and Beckie a whole lot, thats who I stay hyar with. She's my daughter and she works out."
