Project #3613
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro. S. C.
MRS. JENNIE ISABEL COLEMAN
(white)
81 YEARS OLD
Mrs. Jennie I. Coleman is a widow of high social connections, and has many relatives and friends throughout the county of Fairfield. She is an authority on the history of that section known as Feasterville. At the present time, she is residing with her sister, Mrs. Mary C. Faucette, who lives on the west side of State Highway #215, near the intersection with the side road leading to Shelton, S. C.
"Our neighborhood has always had something peculiar or distinctive about it - a little different from the other portions of Fairfield County. The early settlers were Feasters and Colemans. These two families have made this section noted for its conservatism and for its responsiveness to any progressive movement tending to civic betterment and commendable reform.
"The Feasters are of Swiss origin, from the Canton of Berne. The name was originally 'Pfeister,' but changed to 'Feaster' in the early days of the Colony. The family come to the colony of South Carolina from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. I have seen and inspected the grants of land to Andrew Feaster among the records in the office of the Secretary of State, Columbia, S. C.
"The Colemans came from Wales to America; first to Virginia, then to Halifax County, N. C., and, finally, to South Carolina, purchasing lands in this section. The first Coleman was David Roe Coleman, a remarkable man in the early times of the settlements. He was a surveyor, a humane slave owner, a useful citizen, and a good neighbor. Old Ben Tillman once said in a Charleston speech, 'I am God Almighty's gentleman.' The silk hat, silk glove crowd was generally shocked, and they held pp their hands in horror as if the utterance was profaneeand sacrilegious. It is, really, a quotation taken from John Dryden, and I think I can use it of this old ancestor, 'He was one of God Almighty's gentlemen.'
"I married my cousin, Edward W. Coleman, a widower with two boys, David Roe and John Marsh Coleman. We had one child, a boy, John Albert Feaster Coleman, named for his grandfather. He took pneumonia and died in his sixteenth year. My husband died in 1918.
"My grandmother was Chaney Feaster, born in 1800, and died in 1878. She married Grandfather Henry Alexander Coleman in 1822. My father was the son of this couple. He was born June 9, 1828, and died April 30, 1898. She Fairfield News and Herald said this on his death: 'Mr. John A. F. Coleman, one of the most highly esteemed citizens of Feasterville, is dead. He was a Confederate soldier and a good citizen. He was captain in the 17th Regiment. He entered the army as a private in 1861, served with honor throughout the war, and sheathed his sword a captain with Lee at Appomattox.' He and my mother, Juliana Stevenson, were married October 15, 1853. There were twelve children, including me.
"You ask what are the characteristics that make than a 'peculiar people'? These were more marked intthe first seventy-five years of the nineteenth century than at the present time. 1. The love of home. 2. Intermarriage. 3. Fostering of local schools and convergingthe thought of the whole neighborhood to the advantage to be had in a central school, 'The Boarding House', as it was called from its foundation to the present time. 4. Humane treatment of their slaves. 5. Making the most of their fertilisers in the nature of compost. This compost had many ingredients. Leaves, pine needles, rich earth from the forests, stable manure, rakings from the cow lot, woods ashes, and raw cottonseed were the things that formed the principal component parts of the compost. Sometimes lime was added to the mixture.
"At our home there was never an idle day for master or slaves. Fences had to be looked after; gullies filled and erosion arrested; the winter wood (fuel) must be chopped in the forests and stacked; and all idle hours were devoted to the assembling of material for compost making. This seemed to be the bustom of the section. The people also began breeding their own horses and rules, instead of buying than from Tennessee, Kentucky, and Missouri.
"They rarely bought a Negro, and never sold one. A slove had some rights that were respected. Ample food, sufficient clothing, and a log house, which he could arrange with mortar to suit his comfort, was furnished. Punishment was sure but mild in cases of disobedience, and was severe in instance of flagrant crime. Six landowners had the power to try, condemn, sentence, and hang a slave. This power was sometimes exercised.
"The last distinctive characteristic of the people I wish to call your attention to is the religion they established here – Universalists. The deed of a gift of lands to the Universalist Church, Feasterville Academy, and Boarding House was made by John Feaster in 1832. He appointed his three sons, Andrew, Jacob, and John, trustees of the property, with power to name their successors. It has been a continuing body to hold the property in trust for the purpose of promoting religion and education until the present time. I will say just a few words about our Universalist faith and doctrine: We believe that Christ lived and died, not to save a select few, but for the saving of all mankind. As in Adam, all men died; so, in Christ, all men will live again. It is not what a man's creed is, but what his life is that counts with God. There is salvation in all churches; still, let not dry rot overcome the creed. Every man who lives for the progression of the ideal in his age, as my father did, will never die, end every good woman like my mother will some sweet day 'sit in the tresses of the snow white rose of paradise'."
"As the French say, 'Let as search for the woman in the case.' We have found one who is entitled to distinctive honors, along with John Feaster, in founding 'The Boarding House.' She, Catharine Stratton, was born in Virginia in the year 1810. She worried a portrait painter, George Washington Ladd, and came with him to South Carolina. She was a gifted teacher and a writer of poetry and plays.
"On one occasion, while Mr. Ladd was at the easel painting a portrait of Mr. Feaster, Mrs. Ladd, remarked: 'Mr. Feaster, why don't you build a school in this populous community for your relatives and friends?' His reply was a question, 'If I build the schoolhouse, will you teach the school?' She assented.
"From that hour, this dear woman devoted her life to school teaching, and no name among woman is more honored or loved to this day in Fairfield than that of Miss Kate Ladd. After the Civil War, the building was used as a family residence. But after the redemption of the State from carpetbag government by the Hampton and Red Shirt movement, it was used for years as a neighborhood school.
"The people of our section, yielding to the idea of consolidation of schools, combined their school with another and formed the Monticello High School at Salem Crossroads. The question now arose as to what could be done with 'The Boarding House.' We raised a sufficient amount of money and sponsored a W.P.A. project; whereby, the building was remodeled, covered, and painted. The interior now consists of three rooms and a large clubroom on the first floor. A staircase leads to the upper story where a large dance hall or ballroom is furnished. The original brass knobs remain on the lovely paneled doors. The four carved mantels and the fan-shaped arch over the front entrance remain as John Feaster first had them placed. From an authenticated genealogy of the family, the descendants of the founder, John Feaster, now number 1,178 persons. Many begin to make 'The Boarding House' a shrine of interest and pilgrimage. Luckily the old building has not been allowed to rot and moulder away. It is still an object of beauty in the community's landscape, a center of recreation and enjoyment, still possessing some semblance of the founder's ideas of usefulness and culture to the community.
"My schooling and education was begun at 'The Boarding House' school during the war. My first years were 1865, '64, '65. After that year there were no schools in the community, but instruction by governesses went on in the homes. Later, I went to Miss Nannie Keller and finished school at the Feasterville Academy, then taught by Professor Busbee.
"Do I remember anything about the military government in this section prior to Reconstruciotn? Yes, I had a cousin, Biggers Mobley, who, just after the war, went to his cottonfield and reproved a Negress for the way she was working. Enraged, she cut him several times with a hoe, leaving scars to the day of his death. Biggers pulled his pistol and shot her, but the wound was trivial, according to the attending physician, Dr. J. W. Babcock. Biggers was arrested, and, as we were under military District No. 2, he was taken to Charleston where Negro jailers treated many of our best people worse than beasts. When the tub of corn meal mish was brought around, those confined had to extend their palms, into which the rush was ladled. This was the only food they were given. His wife went to Charleston and had a hard time gaining access to the jail to administer food and comforts to her husband. The filthy prison told on his health, and, when he was finally liberated, he did not live long as result of ill treatment.
"Our section was a long distance from a railroad; in fact, the extreme northern portion was called 'the dark corner.' Strange man would come in Ku Klux times, find a safe retreat, accept hospitality for while, and then leave. The women and older children would surmise that these men were Ku Klux members in hiding, and our romantic fancies would surmise their deeds, hair-breath escapes, and romances. But we really never learned anything - so reticent were our parents and elders on the subject.
"Our section yielded to none in its ardent support of the Red Shirt Movement that elected Wade Hampton governor. The hate of oppression and the love of independence united these people to throw off the yoke of carpetbag government. The casuist may see a crime in the acts of fraud at the Feasterville box in 1876, but our people realized that a condition, not a theory, confronted them. Half our votes had been left on the battlefields of our country, we were already the political serfs of our former slaves. And if things kept on as they were, we would become their industrial servants also. We feared that the scum of the North's disbanded army, not content with political supremacy and ownership of lands and property, would come down South and demand social equality, and that the South, held down by Federal bayonets, would have to submit and live among its horrors or seek asylums and homes in other parts of the world.
"The victory won, our section resumed its ordinary pursuits of country life, formed a grange, discussed agricultural problems, and were content to leave the honors and offices to other sections. They remained quiet until 1883 and 1884, when the greenback question excited the Nation. We were derided as 'greenbacks.' Captain D. R. Feaster was our speaker and public writer. He said: 'The jugglers of high finance try to show a distinction between the government's promise to pay in specie and a simple promise to pay. It is a distinction without a difference. A silver or gold certificate and simple promise to pay, each depends upon the perpetuity of the government. If the government ceases to be a Nation, it can no more pay its silver and gold certificates than it can meet its simple promissory note'."
A difference. A silver or gold certificate and simple promise to pay, each depends upon the perpetuity of the government. If the government ceases to be a Nation, it can no more pay its silver and gold certificates than it can meet its simple promissory note'."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTOTY
TITLE:	FROM FARMING TO POLITICS
Date of First Writing	March 17, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Sam T. Clowney
Fictitious Name	Sam T. Colin
Place	Winnsboro, South Carolina
Occupation	Retired Farmer
Name of Writer	W.W. Dixon
Name of Reviser	State Office
Sam T. Colin, an aged man, lives with his son, George M. Colin, in the Winnsboro Mill village on the southern outskirts of the town of Winnsboro. He is six feet two inches in height and weighs one hundred and eighty-six pounds; has a large head resembling a two-yolked hen egg; is aggressive of manner and speech; and has been a lively and industrious personality in Fairfield County's history for the past fifty years.
Coming into the town hall, without salutation, he said: "I wonder if you'd like to buy a puppy for five dollars this morning? You know women and girls like to have these kind of pets, and these puppies are genuine for terriers. They are out of a little slut I got from Bill Ellison and a small terrier dog I got from Henry Phillips. You've seen both and must have admired them."
"Sit down, sgm, suppose we talk awhile about the days that are gone. We'll talk about the puppies later. As old Policeman Gilbert used to say, 'Maybe you'd like to wet your whistle with a drop of red eye before you begin." Yes? Well, drink heartily."
"Well, Dick, I am now 77 years old, and, while my right hand has lost its cunning, my tongue will not cling to the roof of my mouth this morning.
"Yes, Moses Colin was my father, and my mother was Susan Colin. Her grandfather was one time sheriff of old Fairfield District. He was some pumpkins. I wouldn't fool you.
"I was born near Buckhead, a post office on a star mail route, before the coming of the rural mail delivery. My birth was March 6, 1862.
"My oldest brother, James R., was a Confederate soldier. He died of dysentery in the War of Sesession. The next in the family was John Simonton. Then came Sister Hester: then Brother Robert, who for many years was a policeman in the city of Columbia. Next was Sister Mary Elizabeth, who married, lived, and died in Winnsboro. I was the youngest child and am the only surviving one of the family.
"Buckhead, near where I was born, was the Means' Settlement. A very aristocratic element of our people had their homes there before the Civil War. Our small plantation and home were hemmed in and surrounded by the gentry – such people was Governor John Hugh Means, Dr. James Furman, Chancellor Harper, Dr. McMahon, and Congressman Trotte, who married one of the Means girls. Here Preston S. Brooks, who used a cane on Senator Summers of Massachusetts in the U. S. Sennate, came a courting and married another one of the Means girls. The Lyles, first settlers in the county, lived not far from us. I grew up in the neighborhood a little over-awed by such fine people and a little disgruntled that the Lord or economic conditions had made it so our family couldn't hold a candle to such elegance and fine doings as went on among them. We only owned 318 acres of land and a few slaves.
"After the Civil War, when the Negroes were set free, our family was better able to meet the changed conditions from slave to free labor than those surrounding us. The boys in our neighborhood knew nothing but how to ride and make gallant speeches to the girls. The girls knew how to ride a horse on a crazy sidesaddle and how to dance. We boys in our family could do anything a slave boy was required to do, and my sisters could do all a slave girl could do.
"My first school days began when I was six years old. I went to a one-teacher school, taught by Miss Josephine Ladd. She liked for us to call her Miss Joe. We had only one book the first month, Webster's Blue Back Speller. Then we were put in arithmetic and learned how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide. I think we went to Miss Joe four years. My next teacher was Miss Chanie Coleman. Went to her three years. The last school I attended was the Feasterville Boarding House School, taught by Prof, Busbee.
"My father encouraged independence in thought and self-reliance
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	FROM FARMING TO POLITICS
Date of First Writing	March 17, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Sam T. Clowney
Fictitious Name	Sam T. Colin
Place	Winnsboro, South Carolina
Occupation	Retired Farmer
Name of Writer	W.W. Dixon
Name of Reviser	State Office
Sam T. Colin, an aged man, lives with his son, George M. Colin, in the Winnsboro Mill village on the southern outskirts of the town of Winnsboro. He is six feet two inches in height and weighs one hundred and eighty-six pounds; has a large head resembling a two-yolked hen egg; is aggressive of manner and speech; and has been a lively and industrious personality in Fairfield County's history for the past fifty years.
Coming into the town hall, without salutation, he said: "I wonder if you'd like to buy a puppy for five dollars this morning? You know women and girls like to have these kind of pets, and these puppies are genuine for terriers. They are out of a little slut I got from Bill Ellison and a small terrier dog I got from Henry Phillips. You've seen both and must have admired them."
"Sit down, sgm, suppose we talk awhile about the days that are gone. We'll talk about the puppies later. As old Policeman Gilbert used to say, 'Maybe you'd like to wet your whistle with a drop of red eye before you begin." Yes? Well, drink heartily."
"Well, Dick, I am now 77 years old, and, while my right hand has lost its cunning, my tongue will not cling to the roof of my mouth this morning.
"Yes, Moses Colin was my father, and my mother was Susan Colin. Her grandfather was one time sheriff of old Fairfield District. He was some pumpkins. I wouldn't fool you.
"I was born near Buckhead, a post office on a star mail route, before the coming of the rural mail delivery. My birth was March 6, 1862.
"My oldest brother, James R., was a Confederate soldier. He died of dysentery in the War of Sesession. The next in the family was John Simonton. Then came Sister Hester: then Brother Robert, who for many years was a policeman in the city of Columbia. Next was Sister Mary Elizabeth, who married, lived, and died in Winnsboro. I was the youngest child and am the only surviving one of the family.
"Buckhead, near where I was born, was the Means' Settlement. A very aristocratic element of our people had their homes there before the Civil War. Our small plantation and home were hemmed in and surrounded by the gentry – such people was Governor John Hugh Means, Dr. James Furman, Chancellor Harper, Dr. McMahon, and Congressman Trotte, who married one of the Means girls. Here Preston S. Brooks, who used a cane on Senator Summers of Massachusetts in the U. S. Sennate, came a courting and married another one of the Means girls. The Lyles, first settlers in the county, lived not far from us. I grew up in the neighborhood a little over-awed by such fine people and a little disgruntled that the Lord or economic conditions had made it so our family couldn't hold a candle to such elegance and fine doings as went on among them. We only owned 318 acres of land and a few slaves.
"After the Civil War, when the Negroes were set free, our family was better able to meet the changed conditions from slave to free labor than those surrounding us. The boys in our neighborhood knew nothing but how to ride and make gallant speeches to the girls. The girls knew how to ride a horse on a crazy sidesaddle and how to dance. We boys in our family could do anything a slave boy was required to do, and my sisters could do all a slave girl could do.
"My first school days began when I was six years old. I went to a one-teacher school, taught by Miss Josephine Ladd. She liked for us to call her Miss Joe. We had only one book the first month, Webster's Blue Back Speller. Then we were put in arithmetic and learned how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide. I think we went to Miss Joe four years. My next teacher was Miss Chanie Coleman. Went to her three years. The last school I attended was the Feasterville Boarding House School, taught by Prof, Busbee.
"My father encouraged independence in thought and self-reliance in his family, and, when I became eighteen years old, I was parcelled off fifty acres of land, given a horse and told: 'See what you can do for yourself.' At this time, I was six feet two inches tall and weighed two hundred ten pounds. I was the best wrestler in the county.
"I made good as a one-horse dirt farmer before I was twenty-one years old, in spite of the lien law prices, which were twenty percent higher than cash prices.
"I made some extra money on the side by buying up poor cows and calves in the winter, fattening then up in the spring of the year, and selling then to the beef markets in Winnsboro and Chester. This brought me out of the slavery of the lien law credit shackles, and I increased the number of my plows and farm acreage. I bought one hundred seventy-five acres of land and became independent of any assistance from my father.
"My success went a little to my head. But my head, as you can see, is shaped like a double-yolked hen egg. At that time, it could hold a good deal of foolishness in one side and a whole lot of wisdom in the other side.
"Looking at these shreds and patches today, one would hardly think I was once one of the dandies and fops in Fairfield County. Roach, a tailor of Winnsboro, made my clothes. And old man Bob Dunbar, an Irishman, made my sixteen dollar calfskin boots. The year of Grover Cleveland's first election, I wore a Cleveland white beaver hat. And tied around my neck was an Allan G. Thurman red silk handkerchief, as a token of my admiration of the Vice President on the ticket with Cleveland. I kept a fine pair of driving horses.
"Thus equipped and arrayed like Solomon in all his glory, I drove up one day to the home of on influential and prominent citizen, kidnaped one of his girls, and drove off and got married, much to the amazement of everybody and the consternation of the prominent citizen, my father-in-law.
"The result of that elopement has been my children; George, who holds a responsible outside Job with the Winnsboro Mills; Russell, who died two years ago in Florida; Sam Jr., living in Charleston, South Carolina; and ay four daughters.
"I was setting pretty in 1910. I had been able to acquire 596 acres of land and had it in a fine state of cultivation and farming condition. It was stocked with mules, brood mares, and a stallion. The pastures were fenced for cattle, and a cotton gin equipment was on the place. I had money in the bank, and my older children were in Glemson and Winthrop Colleges.
"Then the fool part of my double-compartment head got the upper hand and commenced to function. I bought a Swiss cottage in Winnsboro and moved my family to town. I excused myself for the lack of loyalty to the country life by saying I wanted to give my younger children the advantages that were supposed to flow from a huge school like Mt. Zion Institute.
"A family newly coma to town tries like the devil to get in with society people. They go to much expense to keep in the swim, so to speak. You've heard the saying, 'An idle brain is the devil's work ship.' Well, it's true. I started lonnging around the pool rooms, the livery stables, and taking old cronies in ny surry to baseball games in the surrounding towns. My farm was neglected, and I spent more than my income. "I might have got straight, but the political bee got in my bonnet and kept buzzing about my big head until I ran for the legislature and was elected.
"I was wholly unfitted for the job, and being occupied with its duties didn't have a tendencey to decrease expenses.
"While in politics, endorsed accommodation papers at the banks to the tune of $40,000.00 and put up as collateral security twenty-five bales of cotton, then in the State warehouse system. Nearly every copper and intangible asset was swept away by the failure of my father-in-law and brother-in-law, for whom I had stood security. I am now left with a Job of bailiff for the court of general sessions for Fairfield County.
"Some strange things can happen in the administration of the criminal law. I don't mind relating one that overtook me once, after it has been so many years since it happened. Two friends of nine, Albert C. and Charley F. and myself were subpoened to appear as witnesses in a case at Union Courthouse, in February, 1902, I think it was. At the conclusion of the case, we were paid off by the clerk of court. Then we went to the bank, got our certificates cashed, proceeded to the dispensary, and bought some fine whiskey. From there, we went to the Marion Hotel and registered for dinner. After going to the washroom, where we opened up the liquor, all imbibed to such an extent as to become pretty gay and lively.
"Albert and Charley were fond of pranks and devilment at my expense. We went into the dining room and, it being a very cold day, I sat at the table without removing my overcoat. I sat between them. It was a good dinner, and I became deeply absorbed in consuming a part of it, to the neglect of everything else happening about me. The two friends, taking advantage of my preoccupation of mind, stealthily filled my large overcoat pockets with knives, forks, spoons, and table linen.
"When I had finished eating my dinner, I got up and told then I would wait for them in the lobby. As I was going out, I did notice them gesticulating to the Negro writer, but thought little of it.
"It seemed they were telling him I was a kleptomaniac and was carrying off the hotells knives, forks, spoons, and even the doilies of the hotel in my pockets and to go out and stop me.
"Imagine my surprise and indignation when the Negro boy care rushing out into the lobby and accused me of trying to get away with the hotel's property. The lobby was crowded with people.
"The first thing I did was to knock the waiter down. I then gave vent to such a frenzy of words that the police was called in to quiet the disturbance. I was overpowered and taken to jail, before Albert or Charley could come to my assistance. That was a pretty rough joke, but our friendship survived it. They are both dead now, and the occurrence is one of my heavy memories. Though, at that time, I thought it was tragic and a hell of a trick and a bad way to treat a friend.
"I was elected to the House of Representatives of South Carolina, in 1915, and took my seat in January, 1916.
"After I had been sworn in, a very likely handsome gentleman from Charleston came to me and said, 'Hello, old fellow. I want yo to come to my room after adjournment and let's get acquainted. Some friends will be there who'll be helpful to you in bringing you at once to the front in your cereer here.' I accepted the invitation gladly.
"When I got there, a half dozen or more members of the House had arrived, and more came in later. All the old members became talkative. There were to barrels of beer in the room, one Schlitz and one Budweiser. And several quarts of liquor were on a table. The consensus of opinion, I gathered, was that it was easy to get to the legislature the first time, but hard as nails to get reelected. Our host explained how he got back the second time. He rose and said: 'Sam, when your predecessor, D., was down here, we roomed together and had a kind of David and Jonathan friendship. I felt like I had done nothing to distinguish myself thus far as a member of the House and didn't merit reelection. I sat gloomy before that fireplace one night and my friend D. asked what was the matter. I replied, '"Are we friends enough for you to do something for me without asking any questions?" D. said, '"What is it?' I said, '"I want you to go into the engrossing department tomorrow morning and introduce a bill into the House prohibiting all freight trains from having their initial runs in South Carolina on Sunday."
"'D. came back with the rejoinder: '"In short, you want me to proclaim myself a poor lawyer, a fool for lack of sense, and a sissy type of legislator. I can't do it, T.'"
"'But my political life depends on your doing this, D. Please do it. And in twenty hours you'll see the vital reasons for it."
"'Well, such was our Damon and Pythias friendship that D. introduced the bill. The next night it was read out at the Speaker's desk and referred to the Railroad Committee, of which I was a member. It was published in the News and Courier of Charleston the next morning.
"'That night I entered this room with a sheaf of telegrams in my hands from Charleston County and the islands adjacent to Charleston. I said to D., "See here, all these telegrams protest against your Sunday bill. They say the passage of it will destroy their truck business. They have asked me to arrange a hearing before the committee. A hundred or more wish to appear and show that it will be unfair to them in competition with Florida and Georgia truck farmers in getting their truck to Baltimore and northern markets. They have asked me to do everything to kill your bill." D. said nothing.
"'Well, sir, Sam, it seemed like all the Charleston truck farmers came to the hearing. Before the committee, I made the speech of my life against the bill, with D.'s consent, and I secured an unfavorable report, which was adopted by the full house.
"'My activities in regard to the bill carried me sky high in the next primary election, and I was returned to the House at the head of the ticket.'
"I did not care to return to the House after my term expired, and I retired.
"How such land did I ever own at one time? Well, I bought the following tracts at different times, 295 acres, 318 acres, 178 acres, 11 acres and 123 acres. Total 1278. And I lost all this land on an accommodation endorser and the failure of two banks.
"I am now living with my son, George, who is in the outside service of the Winnsboro Mills. He attends to cultivation of plants and shrubs and is in charge of the beautification of the premises of the homes.
"My time is taken up in breeding rat terriers. But I'm going into the chicken raising business. I'd like to sell eggs and friers to all the mill operatives. I think there is money in the business."
JUDGE WALTER L. HOLLEY
(white)
76 YEARS OLD.
Walter L. Holley, amiable Probate Judge of Fairfield County, is 5 feet 8 inches tall and weighs 140 pounds. He has winning ways with strangers and acquaintances and a glad hand to friends. And that hand is ever open to any one in time of adversity and need. He, perhaps, is the best loved man in the county.
"I have never given much thought to ancestry, believing that we are all descended from Adam and Eve. What most concerns me is right living toward our fellow men. But I believe my ancestry is part Scotch, part English, and a sprinkling of Dutch blood. My ancient people came to the western portion of the present Fairfield territory before the Revolutionary War. In those old times, a spot to be desirable to settle upon and rear a family must lie near a river or stream. There was very little well digging, for lack of labor and tools. So my forefathers settled near Broad River, a boundary between Fairfield and Newberry counties today.
"The first settlers, you know, were hunters and cow herders, rather than agriculturists. They had their cowpens, fishing tackle, and long-barreled rifles. Fish and game were plentiful in streams and forests.
"Our ancient home remains in my retentive memory. It was built of logs, but my father replaced it with a frame building in his lifetime. The old home where I was born is about 6 miles from Jenkinsville, in view from State highway #215.
"My grandfather was Glazier Holley; my father, Nathaniel B. Holley; and my mother, Charlotte E. Holley. I had six brothers and two sisters.
"I was born in November, 1862, on the old farm homestead between Monticello and Jenkinsville. My earliest recollections, as a tot, include a cavalcade of Yankee soldiers galloping on the highway by our home, but, as to specific acts and doings on these facts, I was too small to record them in my memory.
"A detachment of cavalry under Colonel Kirkpatrick were encamped in the neighborhood for several days. They came up on the Fairfield side of Broad River, after creasing Freshley's Ferry, and spent several nights near Jenkinsville. Colonel Kirkpatrick and his officers slept in the G. B. Douglas house. Later, they moved up to Monticello and made Doctor James Davis's large residence their headquarters. When they departed, they crossed Little River at the Old Brick Church, ripping up the church floor to construct a bridge across the stream. For days after their departure, the air was foul with the stanch of dead cattle, and the heavens were beclouded with flying turkey buzzards. Before leaving, they, in groups, ransacked our home of blankets, feather beds, and pillows. They killed our hogs and drove off all our mules, horses, and cows. They took many male slaves with them to herd and drive the mules, horses, and cattle, and some of the female slaves to act as cooks, washerwomen, and body servants. It is a pity for the whole South that they did not take all the Negroes out of the country. We would have learned self-reliance and self-dependence sooner, become inured to manual toil in the fields and not be as we are described today, "The Nation's Economic Problem No. 1.
"There were no public schools in the early years following the Civil War, and the private tuition schools ran three months, commencing in December and ending in March. The first one I attended was at Jenkinsville, taught by a Mr. James Hutchinson. People had very little money, and the teachers boarded around among the patrons to make the tuition fall uniformly upon their pocketbooks. Money was so scarce that few books could be used. Sometimes two or more pupils bought text books in common, thus reducing expenses. Two causes contributed to the short length of the school session. One was lack of money; the other was the need of the children to scatter guano, hoe cotton, pick cotton, pull fodder and glean corn. Children at our home learned to work.
"The second teacher I went to was a Miss Julia Glass, from Cokesbury, South Carolina, a very good instructress.
"Later, I attended the Broad River Academy at Monticello, which was under the charge of Captain Hayne Mcmackin. It was later under Colonel Henry C. Davis, father of R. Means Davis. He was assisted by a Mrs. Scott.
"Next I went to work on our farm. Cotton prices ran down and got as low as 5 cents a pound in 1883. Seeing little to induce me to becomae a farmer, I went to work for the Spartanburg, Union, and Columbia Railroad, on one of its freight trains.
"About this time, the Richmond and Danville Railway Company leased a number of lines in South Carolina, and my services become such that I could be directed on any of their lines in the State. One day, November 1, 1885, I suffered injuries at Belton, South Carolina. As a result of the injuries, my left leg had to be amputated near the ankle, and since that time. I have worn a cook foot, or should I say leg?
"After my railroad service was ended, I went back to the old home and looked after the farm, as best I could, and was both rash and fortunate enough to fool a good woman into marrying me. She was Agnes T. Seybt of Cokesbury, Anderson County, South Carolina. We were married in November, 1889, forty-nine years ago. We will celebrate our golden wedding anniversary next year.
"Thirty-eight years ago (1900) we moved to Winnsboro, and I began work as a clerk in the store of Q. D. Williford a Company. I next clerked for Hickling and Gladden. I left them to clerk one year in Chester, South Carolina, for Joseph Wylie a Company. I returned to Winnsboro and was with D. V. Walker & Company for a number of years; then with Ketchin Mercantile Company several years, to return to D. V. Walker & Company, with whom I ended my life as a merchandise salesman in 1908.
"In the spring of 1908, the incumbent of the Judge of Probate's office, Durham A. Broom, died, and a primary election of the Democratic Party was determined upon by His Excellency, Governor Martin F. Ansel, to fill the unexpired term. I entered the race with former Judge John J. Neil, W. W. Crosby, and Jason Hell, Sr. When the votes were counted I lacked 97 votes of being elected on the first ballot. In the second primary, I defeated Judge John J. Neil. Not since that election have I had opposition for the office. This, probably, constitutes a record in length of service (30 years) in the entire State of South Carolina. Some may have held an office longer than I have, but none, so far as I know, have held a state or county office so long without opposition. Many varied, interesting, and sometimes ludicrous experiences have occured in the administration of the office. During the last three decades, I have joined in holy bonds of wedlock something over 3,000 couples. I have issued many marriage licenses, however, wherein some ministers of the Gospel later performed the marriage ceremony. Couples from Maine to Florida have stopped by to be joined in the peculiar South Carolina indissoluble bonds, risking the hard knot, for weal or woe.
"Some of my experiences, in this line of privilege and duty, have been highly humorous, indeed. I will mention two only, but, with variations, they are typical of many cases. On one occasion, a voter declared he was going to scratch Holley, even though he had no opposition at the next election, because he had got him in a h-- of a marriage mess - tied up forever to a nagging, chew-the-rag kind of woman:
"On another occasion, a Negro came into the office and paid me for a marriage license, which I filled out and issued to him. He thanked me profusely* saying, ' I'm all heeled now for a little bit of hebben, Boss: Ain't it so?" He returned the next Saturday with a virile, combative looking female and asked for the ceremony to be performed at once, that "her" was in a hurry. I asked for the license, which he produced. I proceeded. Everything went along all right until we got down to the place in the ceremony where I asked. 'Do you, Sallie Moore, take this man to be your --' Then 'her' raised her head and voice, 'Dat ain't my name. He done got shudder gal in dat license, Judge, and I ain't gonna stand for it. ' deed I ain't.'
"It seems as if Henry had changed his mind within the week as to the girl he wished to marry. He declared, however, that he didn't think it made any difference about the name on the paper, so long as he had paid for the license. 'Just scratch out Sallie Moore and put in Mary Ballard, Judge, and let's get it all over if you please, Judge, befo' dat other gal gits here.'
"The salary and fees of the office of Probate Judge for Fairfield County were very small when I was first sworn into office. It was about $600.00. Under a wave of retrenchment in Ben Tillman's administration, the emoluments had been cut. I went to the State senator and the three representatives from Fairfield and complained at the meagerness of the amount allowed. The senator agreed to raise the salary to $700.00. Two representatives objected and killed the bill in the house. In the next campaign, it became a minor issue. The senator and one representative openly advocated the increase in salary; the others were silent on the question but talked to me, in private, as if they favored it. The legislature came on. The bill was introduced in the senate and passed that body. Then it reached the house, two members objected, but they were ignorant of the rules of the house. You, a representative from Fairfield, then inserted the increase in the supply bill by way of an amendment and secured its passage. After the session, the two objectors cane to my office to explain why they did not let the bill pass to increase my salary and said they would get it passed if reelected. I drew down the Acts and Joint Resolutions and read the item in the Supply bill of the county. They were dumfounded to discover that, not only the increase was there, but I had been given all the marriage license fees thereafter issued. I don't think either ever learned how you accomplished the effective trick amendment, but neither were returned to the house. My compensation is now about three times the amount it was when I first took office in 1908.
"If I may be allowed a voluntary remark or two, permit me to say that our unique position in regard to divorce of husband and wife makes one scratch his head, sometimes, to ponder whether all marriages are arranged in heaven or if the devil doesn't have a little to do with a fractional part of them here below. Sometimes, a very fine man or woman may have been deceived, overreached and allured into a matrimonial alliance. Afterward, love changes into indignant disgust and repulsion on the part of the one deceived. This is considered by other States as a valid reason for divorce. But there is no door of escape for either party to the alliance in South Carolina. About the beginning of the present century, one of our eminent men, a certain judge became so obsessed with the idea of the perfection of our constitutional law prohibiting divorce of husband and wife, for any cause, even the scriptural reason, that he engaged in a controversy with an eminent churchman in the columns of a New York newspaper on the subject. This controversy was reprinted in the News & Courier of Charleston, South Carolina, and some daily papers of this and other states. The judge at the time was a widower.
"Not long after the publication, the judge was 'roped in by a dame' and tied to her hard and fast under the South Carolina law in marriage. Soon the alliance became distasteful. But alas! there was no balm in Gilead, under our laws, to give surcease to the judge's connubial sorrows and heartaches.
"Since my boyhood, many changes have taken place affecting the social relations between the hue band and wife. Woman had no political rights and man was the bread winner then. The wife was little more than a slave of the husband and bearer of his children. She was his cook, housekeeper, nurse, and sometimes seamstress, gardener, and washerwoman. These duties were performed by her gratuitously - free of charge. Children were slaves in the fields and industrial plants and were cheated of their rights to an education. There were no compulsory education laws then. Neither was there a child labor law on the statute books. Thousands of country girls were born to blush unseen and to waste their sweetness on the remote eroded hillsides. Other thousands of children under fourteen years of age, worked twelve hours a day in industrial plant a to evolve that quizzical biped, the "mill daddy", who sat around, whittled sticks in the sunshine of back alleys, drank corn whiskey, told smutty jokes, and guffawed among unsavory companions until pay day. Then he received his wife's and children's money that they had earned by hard labor. He spent the most of it for more liquor and came home in the late hours of the night, drunk, to beat the wife and children. It has been a half century worth living in, to witness this rise of woman from a domestic chattel and a serf of the household to become the civic and political equal of man. There remains nothing now to debar her from becoming a leader in the social, economic, and educational affairs of the county, state, or nation. I cite two organizations here, the Parent-Teacher's Association and the Federation of Women's Clubs, and two individuals, Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt and Francis Perkins, Secretary of Labor. There are many more clubs I could Mention, but what is the use? They come to your mind and to many more individual's. Neither clubs nor individuals hide their beneficent light under a bushel. Shining through and in it all is the radiant love of child welfare. A silent warfare where carnage and destruction of hones are unthought of. A silent warfare for the people's welfare:
"Excuse this digression. I will go back to our ' no divorce law,' to tell you what can happen under it to perplex the solicitor in the court of general sessions and bring the law into disrespect.
"I issue a license to James Jones to marry Janie Brown and perform the ceremony. They live together six months, then separate. James Jones goes to Chester, secures a license from Probate Judge Yarborough to marry Sallie Smith, He performs the ceremony. James brings Sallie back to Winnsboro and sets up housekeeping, two doors from where Janie resides with her parents, the Browns. Everything goes along as merry as a marriage bell in a Turkish hares until Sallie makes some disparaging remarks about the Cara Nome perfume Janie is using. Janie loses self-control, rushes to the magistrate and swears out a warrant against but James and Sallie for bigamy. They are arrested, but they give bond for appearance at court. The grand jury returns a true bill on the back of the indictment. The case cones on to trial. The solicitor introduces the marriage records of Janie and Sallie. The courthouse spectators begin to cast eyes of pity upon poor pretty Sallie, wife number two. The solicitor looks with triumph at the judge and announces: 'That's our case, Your Honor. The State rests.'
"The judge, the jury, and the spectators believe it an unbreakable, impregnable case, technically made out for the State. 'Wonder why they didn't plead guilty and ask for mercy, 'is whispered. James' lawyer rises, opens his brief case and pulls out a stamped paper issued by the Probate Court of Charleston County, South Carolina. It is a license issued to James to marry Daisy Ledbetter and a record of a marriage antedating the marriages to Janie and Sallie. The records are introduced in evidence. The judge remarks to the solicitors. These marriages to Miss Janie and Miss Sallie are null and void. The facts submitted do not sustain the allegations of the indictment. To convict the defendants you must first prove the validity of the marriage of James Jones to Janie Brown. You allege the validity of the marriage of James Jones to Janie Brown. It is disproven, because at that tins he had a wife. To explain this, which might be a little mystifying to anyone other than a lawyer, we will suppose:
1. James Jones first married Daisy bed better in Charleston County, South Carolina.
2. He gets a divorce in Fulton County, Georgia.
3. He then marries Janie Brown in Fairfield County and leaves her.
4. He next goes to Chester and marries Sallie Smith.
If Janie indicts him for bigamous marriage with Sallie, he can plead the Marriage to Daisy, end the case is thrown out of court.
"If a prosecution gets behind him, later, for bigamy or adultery based on the Charleston marriage to Daisy, he just takes the bus with Sallie and rides to Hogansville. Georgia, or Gastonia, North Carolina.
"It's a little confusing, a bit tragic, sad very curiously amusing. Again, in every county in South Carolina I venture to say there are numbers of professional and wealthy men who were first married under South Carolina laws; later obtained a divorce in some other State and came back here and married some good woman and, according to our customs, are peacefully living in their homes. Some of these men may occupy prominent positions in society; may be elected elders or deacons in our churches, where there is a requirement that a deacon must be the husband of one wife. Again, he may be elected a circuit judge or foreman of jury, who may be called upon to take part in determining the social status of one of these 'fly by nights, 'black or white citizens. You will find lots of them talking about the sanctity of the United States Constitution and the State constitution. But, like the old fable in the blue-backed speller about the Partial Judge. 'It depends on whose ox is gored.'"
OLIVER JOHNSON. D. D.
(White)
72 YEARS OLD.
Doctor Oliver Johnson, pastor of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church et Winnsboro, South Carolina, is one of the outstanding ministers of his denomination in the South and a prominent citizen of the Piedmont section of South Carolina. He is 6 feet tall and weighs 185 pounds. By his dignity and force of strong personality, ha attracts attention in any assemblage of people. He is easily approached in conversation; is a good listener and a better talker. He is fond of children and possesses the confidence and affectionate regard of all classes of society in Winnsboro and Fairfield County. He and his family reside in the large manse of the A. R. P. Church on West Liberty Street, in the town of Winnsboro.
"My father was Henry McKinney Johnson. His ancestor was one of the pilgrims who came over on the Mayflower to America in 1620. He was a descendant of William Brewster. My mother, Mary Eliza Bouchillon, was descended from the Bouchillons that came with the Huguenots from France and made the settlement in Abbeville County known as Bordeaux. I was born at Bordeaux, Abbeville County, July 30, 1866.
"My father was a farmer. He bought a home in the small college town of Due West and moved our family there in 1873. I received my primary schooling in the preparatory department of the college. Mrs. Louisa Galloway was my first primary teacher in the rudiments of how to spell, read and write.
"Doctor Wm. Moffatt Grier had been elected president of Erskine College in 1871. As I reflect upon that era, the task confronting us must have been a difficult one. The South was suffering from the ravages of a devastating war. The people from whom the college expected its patronage and financial support were impoverished and disheartened. Again, the burden of reconstruction was upon them. At that time, Doctor Grier was a young man twenty-eight years old. He had served in the Confederate Army, a member of the 6th Regiment, South Caroline Volunteers. He was wounded at Williamsburg and taken prisoner and exchanged in 1862. But he really seemed born and called of God to the service of Erskine College for this particular period.
"The old endowment was gone, and there were no effective plans for a new one. The question of Mordicai to Esther suggests itself here: 'who knowest whether thou art not come to the kingdom for such a time as this?'
"Doctor Grier soon proved himself preeminently qualified for the position. His worth became known far outside the bounds of his own denomination, and he was generally accepted as an exponent of the highest and best Christian culture in the South. Under his wise administration and guidance, the college extended its influence and attained a place of recognized prominence among the institutions of higher learning in this country. Doctor Grier was great as a teacher of mental and moral science. As president, he was tactful, resourceful, and unstinting in toil and reared a fair superstructure on the foundation laid by the great and good men who preceded him. He has been described as gentle, firm, considerate, and just. He relied on appeals to his student's sense of honor rather than the naked hand of discipline, and rarely did his students fall him.
"His Sabbath afternoon sermons, preached in the Due West pulpit, are ever to be remembered. They have left their impression upon me, while some of his words in the classroom have been forgotten. It was under such environment that my literary education was conducted and my mental and moral nature was developed.
"I gained three medals while at Erskine College. I won the first one for being the best all around pupil in the preparatory department; the second, for being the best declaimer in my freshman year; and the third, for being the best essayist in my senior year. I was graduated at Erskine in 1888, a few days prior to my twenty-second birthday.
"Before leaving the subject of the college, I will relate how one of the legends that used to interest the student body has since become authenticated history. The legend was that Ebenezer Erskine, for whom Erskine College is named, was born six months after his mother's funeral and interment. The explanation of this legend came about recently, when Mr. H. T. Patterson, a Columbia banker, presented the Erskine Theological Seminary with an old copy of Erskine's sermons, printed in the year 1728.
"A startling memoir penned on the flyleaf of the volume describes Mrs. Henry Erskins's death and interment and her subsequent revival by the act of a grave robber. The cryptic thief in this instance, however, played a benevolent role. Providentially his ghoulish act restored Mrs. Erskine to life, saved Ebenezer, her unborn son, and altered Presbyterian church history.
"Ebenezer Erskine, through this amazing incident, was literally projected from the grave to establish the Seceder Church, out of which grew the Associate Reformed Presbyterian denomination and Erskine College. Mrs. Erskine was a victim of epilepsy, according to the story, and suffered from nervous disorders, lapsing into unconsciousness at times for hours. So her seeming death at Dryburgh, Berwickshire was deemed real. A short time after her interment in the family vault, the church sexton, remembering a costly ring that had been left on her finger, secured secret access to the vault. After opening the coffin and failing to loosen the ring from her swollen finger, the sexton attempted to sever the Joint with a knife. The blood and the shock from the knife wound stirred life in the supposed dead body, and Mrs. Erskine arose from the crypt and walked the short distance home.
"As Mrs. Erskine approached the house, her husband, hearing footsteps, exclaimed: 'If I didn't know my Margaret was dead, I'd say that was her footstep on yonder walk.' Henry Erskine was quite correct, for his wife, miraculously, had returned alive. Six months afterward, she gave birth to Ebenezer Erskine. This son, on attaining manhood, disagreed with the teachings of the Scotch Church and led dissenters in forming the Seceder Church at Gairney Bridge, near Kinross, Scotland, on December 6, 1738.
"In the fall of 1888, I began teaching school at Lewisville, Chester County. It was a school supported by subscriptions from individuals in the community. The hours were from 8 a.m. until 4 p.m., with an hour's intermission for lunch and recreation. It was not a graded school. My pupils ranged in age from six to twenty-two years old. It was a pretty laborious job but not an uninteresting one nor a profitless one to as in after life.
"I taught this school for three years, until I entered the Theological Seminary at Princeton, New Jersey, in 1891. I remained at Princeton three years, taking the full course in Theology and obtaining my degree in May, 1894.
"I had been licensed to preach in 1893, by the second A. R. P. Presbytery in session at Due West, South Carolina. I spent that summer with the church in Atlanta, Georgia. The following year, I supplied the pulpit of the First Church, at Charlotte, North Carolina, during the summer, the regular pastor being absent for surgical treatment.
"At the seminary, I had learned that all sermons may be or should be predicated with regard to three subjects: God, man, and Christ, Christ being the mediator between God and man.
"I remember Doctor William Henry Green was the president of the faculty the time I was at Princeton. I was installed as pastor of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church at Leslie, in York County, South Carolina, October 18, 1894. I was Married October 30, 1901, to Tirzah Christine Elliott of Winnsboro, South Carolina.
"In May, 1900, I bore the fraternal greetings of the A. R. P. Synod of the South to the General Assembly of the United Presbyterian Church in ssssion at Chicago. I was an invited speaker at the Young People's Christian Union Convention held at Winona Lake, Indiana, in July 1901. While there, I was presented with a gavel made of wood from Gairney Bridge, Scotland. Under the words 'Gairney Bridge' on the gavel is inscribed 'December, 1733.' this being the month and year that Ebenezer Erskine and his conductors net at Gairney Bridge and organized the movement which came to be known in Scotland as the 'Secession Church' and which was the progenitor in this country of the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church, the members of which are still familiarly called 'Seceders.'
"I was elected a director of Erskine Theological Seminary in 1907 and a member of the Home Mission Board of the A. R. P Church in 1901. By lnvitation, I have acted as chaplain in both the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States Congress.
"I have been in the ministry 44 years and served but two pastorates; the Neely Creek Church at Leslie 14 years, and Bethel Church at Winnsboro, 30 years.
"My paternal grandparents had thirteen children, of which my father, Henry, was the fourth child. My maternal grandparents had fifteen children, of which my, mother, Mary, was the ninth child.
"My wife, though her baptismal name is 'Tirzah Christine,' has always been called 'Tiny'. To the colored population, she is affectionately known as 'Miss Tiny.' To us have been born nine children, five girls and four boys. The 30th day of October, 1938 was the 37th anniversary of our marriage.
"Contrasting public opinion now and fifty years ago, as you request, I would say first that public opinion has been aroused on the subject of public health. Fifty years ago, the people would not have approved the large sums of money now appropriated by the legislature to the State Board of Health and county boards of health.
"Take the town of Winnsboro for example. It didn't have a board of health, a sewerage system, nor a county medical office. It was regarded as an invasion of personal rights to even require vaccination of the children in a home. Individual privies were generally constructed behind merchants' stores in town, and hog pens were within the town limit. The care and sanitation of these places were left to the judgment and will of the owner of the premises.
"Then grocery stores were unsavory places. The vendor had no regard for screens over meats, molasses, and other food stuffs. Flies hummed over and lit on these commodities, but today, by a change of public opinion, rules of boards of health have been enacted, regulating the conduct of these places. The grocery store has become a 'thing of beauty' if not 'a joy forever.'
"Public opinion has been improved on the subject of paved streets and good roads. None of the streets and few of the sidewalks of the town were paved when I came to Winnsboro in 1908. In that day, transportation of heavy loads were effected by wagons and trucks. The power used was mules and horses. Frequently, teams would bog down and stall on the county roads and even on the main streets of our town. Now public opinion has advanced, since the coming of the automobile, and I believe all of our streets and sidewalks are paved or to be paved. Fifty years ago, we really had no State road system worthy of the name. Today, we have a State Highway Department, and the excellence of our State highway is commented upon by the traveling public in this and other states of the Union.
"Public opinion has demanded increased educational facilities. Large, sums of money are raised by taxation for school buildings and teachers' salaries. The individual public school teacher's salary is one hundred percent better than it was in 1888.
"You asked me about the attitude of the public mind toward lynching? In spite of the public inflammatory speeches made by some of our politicians of a decade or more ago, the tenor of which was "To hell with the law and constitution where a rapist is concerned,' I think people have become more sober-minded and are more inclined to let the law have its course in all violations of the law. I can't recall a lynching in Fairfield County in the past 30 years.
"Our county is situated between two rivers, the Wateree and Broad, with numerous streams. Its surface is rolling and hilly. Our farmers had become one crop producers in the main-cotton, cotton, cotton. There was no diversification and little rotation of crops, and no thought was given to the Conservation of the soil. Forests of pine were cut down to feed the furnaces of railroad locomotives. Hard woods were also destroyed for people's fireplaces in cities and towns. When lands ceased to be productive in cotton, more timber lands were demanded, and the waste went on from year to year, greatly increased by the timber merchants and sawmills.
"In spite of the voice of wisdom proceeding from Clemson College and the Department of Agriculture at Washington, as to rotation of crops and methods of soil conservation, it all was more or less unheeded until the present administration at Washington extended a helping hand to the farmer in consideration of his submitting to the plans of farming outlined by the government. Now there are marked changes in the country as you ride through on the excellent highways the National Government has helped to build. Thirty years ago, cotton was about all you saw growing along the highways. Now one sees more corn than cotton. Legumes are everywhere, also a variety of field crops, wheat, oats, rye, and alfelfa, which were little in evidence thirty years ago. One sees more cattle, more hogs and vastly improved schoolhouses.
"As The State said in its editorial a few days ago: 'Good country dwellings do not precede intelligent farming, they come after it and as a result of it. South Carolina is learning how to farm. And if we are alive twenty years hence, we expect to see an impressive number of neat, snug, comfortable homes, as we travel the highways.'
"About young people now and fifty years ago. Human nature will always, basically, be the same. Youth has more freedom now than then, but firm belief that the boys and girls of today are just as good, better, than they were in 1880. I would not exchange the comrade and child of today for that of the parent toward the child of a hal ago."
FAIRFIELD COUNTY
ALEXANDER W. MATHESON (white)
83 YEARS OLD.
A. W. Matheson is an aged gentleman, living alone in the Longtown section of Fairfield County, ten miles east of Ridgeway, South Carolina, on the left side of State highway #34. He is 5 feet 6 inches tall and weighs 153 pounds and is almost deaf. He is intelligent, and, having been a magistrate for thirty years and an executive committeeman of the Longtown democratic clubs for the past fifty- two years, he is well informed of much of the State's political history.
"My father, Alexander Matheson, was a merchant at Camden, South Carolina, prior to the War Between the States. He married Mary Perry. She was a granddaughter of John Perry, better known in his day and generation as 'Old Jack Perry. "Grandfather Perry was a large landholder near Liberty Hill in Kershaw County and owned a great number of slaves at the time of his death. He also possessed some lands in Fairfield County that bordered on the Wateree River, a natural boundary between Kershaw and Fairfield Counties. The Mathesons are Scotch people in descent, and the Perrys are Irish. My grandfather, William Matheson, moved to Camden from Gainesville, Florida, and engaged in merchandising about 1833. I was born in Liberty Hill, not far from Camden, at the home of my Grandfather Perry.
"I spent a great deal of ay boyhood in Liberty Hill. Many of the people there, the McDows, Cunninghams, Browns, Dixons, Curetons and Perrys are my relatives by blood or by marriage. I attended school in Camden but usually spent the week ends in Liberty Hill, riding out every Friday on my pony. While there, I attended church on Sunday at the Presbyterian Church. Ex-Governor John G. Richards' father was the officiating minister. The difference between Governor Richards then and now is, then he was a knee breaches boy and a great rabbit hunter; now he is a well known fox hunter.
"My father didn't have many slaves, only house slaves - a coachman, a butler, who also acted as footman, a Negro man who acted as one of general utility about the store in town and the house on the hill, the cook and her assistant, the laundry woman, two girl nurses, and a dairy women. Of course there were some slave children, but just how many I can't remember.
"I commenced school in Camden when I was six years old. It was the first year of the Civil war. I continued in school until January, 1865. We used the old blue-back speller. I think Noah Webster was the author. I never went te school after the war. My father died during that period, and mother moved with the children to Liberty Hill. I assisted about the farms, up and down both sides of the Wateree River, for a number of years.
"I married Lyda Elizabeth Lewis in 1875 and settled down as a farmer near Longtown, Fairfield County. We have reared the following children: Dorothy, (Mrs. W. S. Hamiter) Winnsboro, South Carolina; Benjamin, who practiced law in Atlanta and died there in 1931; Mary, (Mrs. John Croxton) Heath Springs, South Carolina; Nicholas Peayn a practitioner of medicine, Waco, Texas; William A., a farmer, Longtown south Carolina; Annie Laurie, a teacher at Winnsboro, South Carolina; and the baby, Kathleen, (Mrs. H. G. Smith) Trenton, South Carolina.
"I was old enough to remember when we had a military government in South Carolina. President Andrew Johnson had before him the names of ex-Congressman W. W. Boyce of Winnsboro, Captain Samuel McAlilley of Chester, John L. Manning of Clarendon, Governor William Aiken of Charleston, and Colonel B. F. Perry of Greenville. The last named was appointed, by Presidential proclamation, provisional governor of South Carolina. President Johnson outlined in his proclamation certain steps to be pursued by the citizens in order for the State to be readmitted and accorded the same rights and privileges other States in the Union. Among these were the holding of a constitutional convention. All those who had participated, aided or abetted the Confederate States in the late war, had to secure a pardon signed by the President before he could vote for delegates to this convention. This pardoning business was a sore spot to many of our wealthy and best people. Hot discussion of the subject was engaged in. Some never made the application for pardon; many did. General John Bratton, Colonel James H. Rion, and Judge W. R. Robertson were recipients of pardons and were elected delegates to this State Constitutional Convention of 1865. All I remember about this convention was that Judge David Wardlaw was president and John T. Slean of Columbia was secretary. Slavery was abolished and a peculiar court was established. It was called "The District Court." When a Negro was a party, these courts had exclusive jurisdiction.
"Another good provision was that ministers of the Gospel of any religious faith were declared inelligible to the office of governor or lieutenant governor or to a seat in the General Assembly - declaring that ministers of the Gospel should dedicate all their services to the Lord and ought not to be diverted from the task of saving souls. The Ordinance of Secession was repealed.
"The convention adjourned in September, and an election was held under its provisions in October. There were only about 15,000 votes cast for governor. James L. Orr beat General Wade Hampton about five hundred votes.
"When the first legislature met under the Constitution of 1865, the senate assembled in the library of the South Carolina College, and the house assembled in the chapel on the campus. Governor Orr was inaugurated, and W. D. Porter was installed as lieutenant governor.
"General John Bratton was our senator, and James R. Aiken, W. J. Alston, and B. E. Elkins were our representatives from Fairfield in the legislature. The question arose as to who was a Negro and what constituted a person of color? This was necessary to determine the Jurisdiction of the district courts established. It was declared and made a law that all Negroes, mulattoes, mestisos, and all descendants through them were to be known as persons of color, except that every such descendant who might have of caucasian blood 7/8, or more, should be deemed a white person. The relation of husband and wife amongst persons of color was established. In case of one wan having two or more women, the man was required, before the first day of April, 1866, to select one of his women and have a marriage ceremony performed. In case a woman had a number of men, she had to select one of her men and be married to him by the first of April, 1866. The ceremony required was to be performed by a district judge, a magistrate, or any judicial officer.
"Every colored child born and to be born before April 1, 1866, was declared to be legitimate. Marriage between a white person and a person of color was declared to be illegal and void. All persons of color who should make contracts for service or labor should be known as servants and those for whom they worked should be known as masters.
"The hours of labor weredeclared to be, except on Sunday, from sunrise to sunset, with a reasonable intermission for breakfast and dinner. Servants, it was stipulated, should rise at dawn in the morning, feed, water, and care for the animals on the farm, do the needful work about the premises, prepare their meals for the day, and be ready to go to work at sunrise.
"Just after the war, it was lawful to sentence a convicted person to be whipped. In 1866, General Dan Sickles was assigned in charge of this Military district, No. 2.. Judge A. P. Aldrich sentenced a thief to be whipped. General Sickles interferred and prevented the sentence being carried out.
"Congress took up the question of a whipping post and corporal punishment and passed an act in 1868 prohibiting seceded states from inflicting such punishment for crime.
"Conflicts were the order of the day in South Carolina. The military authorities and the Freedmen's Bureau on one side and Governor Orr and the State courts on the other. ln Washington, there was conflict between President Johnson and Congress, lead on by old Thad Stevens and his Negro wife. Finally, Congress passed an act by which registration was required of all male citizens in South Carolina and an election of delegates by them to a State convention, such election to be held under the protection of the military commandant of the district, General Dan Sickles.
"This brought forth the South Carolina Constitution of 1868. When this constitution was made, it was submitted to those registered voters, mostly Negroes, and ratified by them. It was then submitted to Congrees for approval.
"When the Negroes came up for registration, - it may be remarked, by the way, that they had but one name such as John, Jocky, Catoe, Solomon, Pompey, Wade, Tom and the like - some took the surnames of their former slave owners; others wanted such surnames as Pinckney, Manigault, Fernandez, Bonaparte, Washington, Guerard, Prince, Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, Sherman and Grant.
"When the registration was completed, it showed a Negro majority. Then it looked like every Sharp cunning rascal who could get a carpetbag and transportation from above the Mason and Dixon line put out to the State in quest of political adventure.
"These carpetbaggers and a few South Carolina white scalawags organized the Federal Union Republican Party and laid plans to control the Constitutional Convention of 1868. They accomplished their purpose.
"When this convention assembled, there were 48 white men and 76 Negroes sworn in as members. Of the whites, there were only 23 native South Carolinians; the other 25 were natives of Massachusetts, Ohio, Rhode Island, Connecticutt, New York, Pennsylvania, Michigan, England, Ireland, Prussia, Denmark, Georgia, North Carolina and places nobody has ever found out.
"The convention met in Charleston in 1868, composed as I said of twenty-three scalawags, twenty-five carpetbaggers, and seventy-six Negroes. One of the Negroes came all the way from Dutch Guiana. As they knew nothing about society and constitutional law, it is a wonder that they gave us a constitution as good as they did. It was modeled on the State Constitution of Ohio. We lived under its provisions till 1895. On the whole, it was an improvement over the constitutions of 1791 and 1865, in that it prohibited imprisonment for debt; apportioned representation in the House of Representatives according to the numbers of inhabitants in a oounty; provided for the public free school system; provided compulsory attendance of children in the schools between the ages of six and sixteen years; and prohibited lotteries of every kind.
"The objectionable features of the document in my opinion were: 1. Disqualifying a person who should fight a duel from holding an office under the constitution in the State. 2. Opening all the colleges and schools supported in whole or in part by the public funds of the State to children without regard to race or color. 3. Allowing divorces from the bonds of matrimony, by the judgment of the courts for other causes than adultery, and a conviction of a felony by one of the parties.
"Am I in favor of a dueling law? Well, before 1868, it was the best way to settle disputes among gentlemen. A gentleman dosen't relish the idea of resorting to the courts to settle his personal injuries. Suppose some strapping halfback on a football team would call me a liar or twist my nose or make some reflection upon me or my family? Am I to run to a trial justice and swear out a warrant against him for the indignity? Suppose in a political campaign for Governor or U. S. Senator on the hustings, one candidate, in his mud slinging, accuses his opponent of dishonorable conduct or yellow dog motives. Is he just to hunt up nastier mud and throw back? Gentlemen don't like to wash dirty linen of their family in a courthouse trial. I remember the C. B. Cash and W. M. Shannon duel in 1830. It was a deplorable affair. But knowing Colonel Shannon, personally, and Colonel Cash, by reputation, as the father-in-law of Judge R. C. Watts, I can't see how the fued could have been settled in a session's court without the loss of that prestige so dear to men of their stamp and lineage.
"The next year the legislature passed a bill amending the oath of office so as to require all State officials, upon taking the oath, to swear that they have not fought a duel nor acted as a second in a duel nor aided and abetted in a duel since the year 1881. I have taken this oath of office sixteen times. Our newly elected governor, Burnet R. Maybank, though not born in 1881, will have to take this old bewhiskered oath, word for word, before he can be duly qualified and inaugurated as Governor of South Carolina.
"The Code duelo will ever remain the highest test of physical, mental, and moral courage known to men, as it puts a bantam weight man of 120 pounds on an equality with a heavy weight slugger of 200 pounds of bone, sinew, and muscles.
"It would stop much of the bribery in popular elections and in lobbying around our legislature and Congressional halls, and prevent many divorce suits and marital troubles in our land.
"I still have my old red shirt, first worn by as in the Red Shirt movement of 1876, when I was twenty-five years old.
"Some day I may loosen up and tell you something about the Hampton campaign, the Green back days when Hendrix McLean ran for governor, the Tillman movement, the Farmer's Alliance, the old barroom days, and South Carolina under prohibition, but my bus leaves for Ridgeway pretty soon, and, as old Esquire Gilbert used to say. "I want to wet my whistle ' before I leave town. Won't you join me? I don't drink beer. I can never think of a Southern gentleman guzzling beer! It is not a refined way of getting a high-toned exhilaration! "