Project #3613
Helen Shuler
Columbia, S. C.
11-23-38
Life Stories
Allan Cook, Farmer
Negro
Blythewood, South Carolina.
Allan Cook, a young, slender, happy-go-lucky Negro, with an ever-ready laugh, was left an orphan when he was a very small child. He remembers this mother only slightly and his father not at all. They lived in the little town of Blaney, South Carolina. At the mother's death, her brother took the little boy to raise, although he was already the father of eleven children.
This uncle owns his farm of 110 acres and works four or five miles. Allan had to help with the work on the farm as soon as he was old enough. But his foster parents were good to him, and he always had plenty to eat and warm clothing to wear. They planted cotton, corn, sweet potatoes, oats, and some wheat, and they usually had a good garden. There were cows and chickens and hogs for the winter supply of meat. Allan was taught the principles of good farming and is today putting them into practice. He likes country life and hopes that some day he will own his farm.
As a boy, Allan had very little time for play. While there was always plenty of work to be done on the farm, he and his adopted brothers had lots of fun breaking the young steers so that they could be ridden. They would get on their backs, catch around their necks, and "stick on" as long as possible. Sometimes, if the steer couldn't throw them, he would lie down on the ground. Then the boys had a hard time trying to make him get up. They coaxed him for awhile, prodded him with a stick, gave his tail a twist, and, if none of these worked, piled dry grass close to the steer and set fire to it. When they did this, they had to be ready to jump, as the steer was always ready to leave that place. They owned several dogs and enjoyed hunting coons and 'possums on dark nights, carrying a lantern or a lightwood torch for light. One night they became lost and wandered around in circles almost all night.
During the winter month, the children attended school. As they could attend for only three or four months of the school year, they were in classes with children much younger and smaller than they were. The school children teased then about this, causing them to leave school after they had completed the third or fourth grade. And then, too, by this time, they were old enough and large enough to do the heavier work on the farm.
On Sundays and during the lay-by season, when the "big meeting" was held, the young people attended the church services and met their friends from other communities. It was while attending these meetings that the boys and girls did most of their courting. At that time, Allan belonged to the Methodist Church and attended Shady Grove Methodist Church. But when he moved into another community and was too far from Shady drove to go there, he joined the Round Top Baptist.
Allan and Ruth were married several years ago and now have two small boys. As they were both poor and unable to have a wedding, they just went to the magistrate to have the ceremony performed.
The first year after they married, they went to Mr. Langford's farm to live, and Allan worked for wages. He was paid $5.00 a week and was given a house to live in and a plot of ground for a garden. Fuel was always plentiful on the farm, and they had the privilege of cutting and hauling it from the woods.
But Allen believed that he would make more money if he could sharecrop. So the next year, he moved to Mr. Sam Brown's farm, as a sharecropper. But when the fall came and the crops were harvested and the accounts settled, he found that he was in debt to Mr. Brown about $30.00. In January, of the following year, he heard that Mr. C. H. Wilson wanted a family on his farm. He went to see if he could make arrangement a with Mr. Wilson to take up the debt. Mr. Wilson agreed, and Allan and Ruth moved to the Wilson farm. The following fall, after much hard work, they had some corn, peas, and potatoes for the winter and had paid their debts, but they didn't have any money. During the farming season, the sharecropper borrows from $15.00 to $20.00 a month from the farm owner. The amount varies from month to month, depending upon the food supplies the tenant has accumulated during the growing season and the amount of labor he must hire.
This year Allan is sharecropping on Mr. J. C. Lathrop's farm, three miles northeast of Blythewood, South Carolina, on the Bear Creek road, and cultivates sixteen acres. He and the farm owner decide the division of the acres and the crops to be grown. Allan plants five acres of cotton, ten acres of corn, one acre of millet, and one-half acre of sweet potatoes. He likes this farm better than any of the other three on which he has lived, because the land is richer.
Under the sharecrop plan of farming, the owner furnishes the land, seed, mules, farm machinery, and a house for the tenant. The sharecropper furnishes one half of the fertilizer and the labor. Usually the family is large enough that they do all of the work, but occasionally they have to hire someone to help with the plowing. The women usually do the greater part of chopping and picking the cotton, broadcasting the peas in the corn, and breaking the corn in the fall.
They begin early in the spring to "flat break" or "break broadcast" the land, and then they lay off the rows in preparation of planting the seed. Corn is planted as early as March 15, but cotton is not planted until early in May, because of the cool nights. By the latter part of July, the crops are large enough to "lay-by," and at this time, they sow peas in the corn. This plan helps to improve the land for next year's crop. The peas are also used as food for the family, and the vines, as food for the stock.
Ruth is by far the fastest cotton picker among the women and takes pride in being able to "lead the field." In the late afternoon, when the cotton is being weighed, there is always quite a bit of good-natured banter among the pickers as to who has the heaviest sheet of cotton. Ruth is usually ahead by a good many pounds.
This fall, 1938, they were not able to "pay out," as the cotton crop, the crop upon which they depend for money, was very short because of weather conditions and the damage done by the boll weevil. When the cotton was sold, it brought just a fraction over eight cents a pound. This portion is held against them, added to next year's debt, to be taken out of the crop in the fall.
As soon as the crops were harvested, Allan obtained work with Mr. Hawley, cutting pulpwood. But when the Wage-Hour law went into effect, Mr. Hawley was forced to stop the work, as he was unable to pay twenty-five cents an hour, which is the minimum wage rate in accordance with an act passed by the United States Congress in 1938.
This family of five, Allan and his wife, Ruth, their two babies, and Ruth's younger sister, who lives with them to help with the children, has for the winter about twenty-five bushels of corn, a small amount of peas, two medium-size banks of sweet potatoes, and seventeen gallons of sorghum. Their two pigs will not be ready to butcher before February. The farm owner gives them several quart a of sweet milk each night, as pay for taking care of one cow.
During the spring and summer months, they had a nice garden of cabbage, onions, butter beans, turnips and mustard greens. These vegetables, with corn bread and hominy, a corn product, make up their diet.
Although they have accumulated very few household goods, their three-room cabin is clean and well kept. The cabin is located in a cotton field about a hundred feet from the road. In the back yard, a few feet from the steps, is a very large chinaberry tree, which furnishes shade from the afternoon sun. In the front, at the northeast corner, is a large black walnut tree, from which they gather an abundance of delicious nuts.
In one room is an iron bed and a bureau with a mirror; in the other, just a bed and a few chairs, as it is also used as a living room. An open fireplace in this room is their only means of heating the house. This fire is also their light at night, as they have only one small kerosene lamp, which is carried from room to room as needed. The kitchen, a small shed room, opens on to the porch. In this room is a dilapidated, second-hand range and a small table. Their few dishes and kitchen utensils are neatly arranged in a safe. On the little back porch is a brand new zinc tub, which serves as a chicken coop. This tub contains their one hen and her brood of four small biddies. She had been brought into the porch so that the guineas could not eat the food from the small chicks. In the yard nearby, their two guineas are calling "pot-rack, pot-rack." One of these guineas is being saved for their Thanksgiving dinner; the other, for Christmas dinner.
Their water supply comes from a spring a few hundred rods from the house. By installing a ram, water from this spring is sent into the owner's home and to the barnyard for the cattle and stock.
Allan and Ruth own an old model Ford automobile. This old car takes them to church on Sundays and on an occasional trip to Columbia. On one of their few visits to town, they attended a moving picture show and thoroughly enjoyed it. The wild riding and gun shooting of the Western picture was the most exciting thing they had ever seen, and they are anxious to see another one. These trips are financed by getting several friends to ride with them, each one paying for a gallon of gasoline.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LITE HISTORY
TITLE: LIVING BY FAITH
Date of First Writing	January 26, 1939
Name of Person	Interviewed W. A., and Susie Crede
Fictitious Names	W. A., and Susie Holmes
Street Address	240 Augusts Street
Place	West Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation	Mill Worker
Name of Waiter	Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser	State Office
A radio was playing full tilt and through the closed door came the strains of the popular song, "The Umbrella Man." To the noise of the radio was the added confusion of crying, petulant children.
When I had rapped several time, the crying within the room subsided and a young girl, followed by two small children with dirty tear-stained faces and dripping noses, opened the door.
"Does Mr. Holmes live here? Is he at home this morning, and may I talk with him a little while?"
"Let me turn off this radio so you can hear. I'll call my father; he's in the next bedroom. He is at home today because he isn't so well. No, ma'am, he isn't sick enough to be in bed. It's just his asthma."
In a pleasant hospitable manner I was invited to come into the room and to have a seat near the coal fire. A glance around showed that the room was used as a living room and bedroom. There in a corner was a dark wooden bed, neatly made with a light-colored spread. A small table near the door held a simple vase; the radio and several chairs comprised the rest of the room's furniture.
While waiting for Mr. Holmes to make his appearance, this rapid speaking young woman and the two children began in their friendly way to entertain me. The children brought out their toys they had gotten from Santa Claus, and the young mother began to tell of her morning's work.
"I've been back in the cook room scrubbing, and I had the radio turned loud so I could work and listen. I love the music and the songs. I was late getting at ay scrubbing this morning. But I declare to goodness, the kids have been so mean today that I couldn't do nothing but tend to them. We usually scrub out the whole house every week, but Marie, she's the colored girl who helps us, is sick, and the weather was so bad all week I didn't get to do it.
"Yes, ma'am, these are my children. I've been married four years. I got married when I was just fifteen. One day I told Ma I was going over to Katie's house to spend the day, and that night, when she came for me to go to prayer meeting, Jim said, 'Well, Mrs. Holmes, I reckon Minnie can't go tonight. She belongs to me now.' Ma almost had a fit, she was so mad, and started to make me go home with her."
Mr. Holmes, a small stoop-shouldered man, had quietly entered the room and taken a seat near the fire. The reason for his choice of seats was soon evidenced by his continual spitting into the fire. He was neatly and cleanly dressed in dark trousers, with a vest to match, and a white shirt. His thick and glossy brown hair showed recent brushing. The expression in his mild, dark-brown eyes and soft voice indicated that he had become resigned to circumstances rather than continue the struggle caused by opposing religious views.
When I made known to him the purpose of my visit, he disclaimed having an interesting or eventful life but willingly told in a quiet and unassuming way of his struggle to provide a few comforts for his family.
"I'm not much good at talking, but I'll be glad to tell you what I know. If Susie, that's wife, was here she'd talk to you. She talks most all the time. I think she'll be here before long, as she just went out to see the doctor. When she's not at home praying, she's gone to visit the sick or needy. Just let her hear of any one who's sick, and she stops whatever work she's at and goes. Even if the dinner is cooking, she just forgets all about it and leaves it on the stove. And when she gets back, if the food is burned, it's all right; and, if the fire is out, it's all right, too. I hope she comes home before you leave. She'll want to see you. She likes to talk to strangers about her sickness and her church.
"There's not very much I can tell about my father, because, when I was six years old, my mother left him and brought us children down here to Columbia. But I can remember he used to tell us how he ran away from his home in Germany and worked in the galley on the ship to pay his way, because he didn't have any money."
Galley? What is the galley of a ship and what kind of work did he do there?
"The sailors call the kitchen the galley, and my father helped to bake the bread. ln those days it took several weeks for the ship to come across the ocean, and he learned enough about baking bread that, when he landed in Charleston, he got a job in a bakery. Then the war (War Between the States) began and he didn't want to join the army; so whenever he heard the officers were coning, he hid in an empty flour barrel behind the shop.
"But he soon left Charleston and moved to Newberry to open a small bakery of his own. He had a good education and could speak three or four languages. He could talk Jew better than a Jew himself. I often think that if I had stayed with him I would have gone to school.
"No, ma'am, I can't read or write, but I know my name when I see it. There were three of us children. I was the middle one. When I was six years old, my mother left my father. I never knew what made her decide to leave. She came down here and opened a small candy store on Assembly Street. We had an awful hard time then. But about that time the Duck Mill started, and I got a job there. I ran the first cotton through the mill. My first wages was twenty-five cents a day, and we worked twelve hours a day. Then they promoted me to draw boy and paid me forty cents a day. If I do brag on myself a little, I was steady on my job, worked hard and tried to do it right. The superintendent seemed to appreciate this and advanced me rapidly, and soon I was a slubber, making one dollar a day. By the time I was fifteen years old, I had a section and was drawing one dollar and fifty cents a day.
"Susie and I got married in 1913, and by that time I was getting twenty-five dollars a week. When the war came on, I made as much as fifty dollars a week. But now I am getting only twenty dollars and twenty cents a week and glad for that. During good times we managed to save a little, and we bought, us a little home out in Shandon for $2,500. We paid $500 cash. That was all we had saved. Then we put a mortgage on for the rest. We were paying the payments of twenty dollars regularly every month until Susie took sick and the mill shut down to part time.
"Then we just couldn't make the payments; so we sold the place for thirteen hundred dollars and moved back here to the village. We got five hundred dollars for our portion, but it didn't stay with us long. There was too many hospital and doctor bills. And Susie was helpless so long. She couldn't walk a step, as her feet were all drawn over on their sides. We had to keep a colored woman here with her all the time, and that cost me seven dollars and fifty cents a week.
"We had a pretty hard time to get along, but I managed to keep my job. And we had enough that neither my wife nor the two girls had to work in the mill. My boy, he's twenty-six, is working in the mill now and pays us five dollars a week board. He runs a section and gets twenty dollars a week. The oldest girl is married and is keeping house on another street. Minnie, the baby girl, is married too, and she and her husband and two little children live here; but they take care of their own expenses. The mill keeps up the houses and our living expenses are not very much. The rent is only one dollar and five cents a week, and our lights usually run one dollar a month. Me and Susie could get along pretty well on my twenty dollars and twenty cents a week, but she is sick so much and always having to run to the doctor. Then she gives away so much. Lots of times she'll go to the grocery store and get two or three dollars worth of stuff and take it to some one. I've bought enough furniture to fill several houses bigger than this one. But if any one comes along wanting something, Susie just sells off a piece. Of if they need the furniture, she just gives it to them. We haven't much left now, just enough to get by with."
"Do you have a garden or keep a cow, Mr. Holmes?"
"No, we have to buy all our vegetables and milk. But it's convenient to do that, because wagons and trucks come by every day with all kinds of stuff. The yards with these houses are too small for a garden or for a cow.
"I don't have time for much recreation, and I don't care to do much more than just to stay home and rest. I never have had a car. Somehow, I never fancied one. I haven't been to a picture show in thirty years. Hardly ever go to church. Once in a while I go to the Riverside Baptist, but I don't belong to any church. On Sundays I like to sit around the house and rest. When I was younger, I used to enjoy hunting and fishing. But now my asthma makes my breath too short. See, I have only three fingers on ay right hand. One time, when I was just a boy, I was fooling with a gun and it went off and shot the flesh off my thumb and first finger. Then the doctor just cut off the bones down to my hand. I don't smoke or chew, as the tobacco gets in my teeth and worries me. But I dip snuff. Been using it about twenty-five years. Susie gives me down the country and calls it a sin and filthy, but I can't stop now."
Mrs. Holmes had not yet returned, and the sun was shinning so warm that Minnie, the two children, and I moved out on to the porch to enjoy it.
"Minnie, tell me something about your husband. What kind of work does he do for a living?"
"Jim works with a construction company; drives a truck. He gets twenty-five dollars a week. He sure is a good husband. We've been married four years and he never has hit me. Jim says that before he'd hit me he'd just leave home. He doesn't believe in hitting a woman. We get along real well, but it sure takes a lot of money to live. The children are always needing so many things."
"Are they well? They look as though they must be."
"Yes. ma'am, they are healthy. Right now both of them have bad colds. But Joanna was sick the whole of her first year and was in the hospital nearly all the time. You see, before she was born I had pus on the kidney, and at the hospital they gave me a spinal injection so they could drain off the pus. It nearly killed me. Then when she was born, she had this kidney trouble from me."
"Do you think it will be much longer until your mother comes?"
"She should have been back long ago. Probably she had to wait to get in to see the doctor. Sometimes there is a crowd ahead of her. But you'll know when she's anywhere near. You'll hear her talking to every one she sees in the neighborhood."
The children had gone out into the yard and were playing and running around the house. Now the larger one, the little girl, came to tell us that "Granny" was coming down the street.
A tiny little woman, weighing no more than seventy-five pounds, came quickly around the corner of the house. Her big blue eyes, set far back in her head, flashed with interest as she took in the group at a glance. Her swarthy skin was stretched tight across her jaw bones and looked thick and leathery. Her nervous hands, never still for a moment, were so thin and long as to resemble a bird's claws. She wore a long black coat over a neat dark print dress, and instead of a hat she wore a brown hair net to keep her thin locks in place.
"Good morning. Mrs. Holmes. How are you feeling today? It's such a beautiful day, every one should be feeling well."
"Well now, I'm not feeling so good. I've been out to see the doctor this morning."
"Mrs. Holmes, I've been told that you have had a most interesting life, that you are such a good woman and do so many things to help the needy. I want you to tell me something about yourself."
Then speaking very rapidly and in a clear thin voice she replied, "Now, for the lands' sakes, whoever told you that surely stretched themselves. But do cone on in the house. I'm tired and I want to rest. I've been over in town all morning waiting on that doctor. There was such a crowd ahead of me."
She led the way through the front room into her bedroom. Pushed as closely up into the corner as possible was a cheap iron bed. Over its thin lumpy mattress was spread a soiled gray cotton blanket. There were no pillows. A low tool box was placed against the wall between the door to the adjoining room and the corner fireplace. In the back corner of the room was a battered trunk. The room was lighted by two windows, at which hung light-colored paper shades. One of these was in a fairly good condition, but the other had worn off halfway from the top, and had been pieced out with newspaper. Across one corner of the room had been stretched a cord clothesline, on which was hanging several of the baby's diapers. The unpainted pine floor was sandy and dingy. Ashes from the coal fire had fallen through the grate and covered the hearth.
When Mrs. Holmes seated herself in her rocking chair, the smaller of the two children crawled into her lap and snuggled against her. "Minnie," she said, "do give me something to wipe this child's nose with."
"Well, Ma, I just don't know where I'll find anything." And after vainly searching for the necessary article she concluded with, "Oh, just use his apron. I'll have to wash today, anyway. Goodness, they take so many clothes. I have to wash for them every day."
"I do enjoy doing what little I can for the sick," Mrs. Holmes began, "and sharing the little I have with those who are needy. You know our Master says, 'In as much as you have done it unto the least of these, you have done it unto me.' I go whenever I am able to go. But I am sick so such of the time. The doctors told me a long time ago there wasn't anything they could do for me. They could Just patch me up. At that time I belonged to the Riverside Baptist Church, but I wasn't a Christian. I hadn't been saved.
"One night I was awful sick. I was in a dreadful fix. Couldn't hardly walk. Just hobble along with some one holding onto me. My feet were turned over on their sides. The doctor came that night and told me I'd die before morning. There wasn't another thing he could do. Then the preacher, Dr. Derrick, came to pray for me so I could go to heaven. After they left me, I thought about some passages I had read in my Bible: 'Is any sick among you? Let him call the elders of the church; and let them pray for him.' And another, 'And the prayer of faith shall save the sick and the Lord shall raise him up.' Then I remenbered about the meeting going on over at the Free Will Holiness Church. I called my husband and told him I was going there to get them to pray for me."
"You can go if you want to," he told me, "but I am not going to help you get there. I don't believe in such foolishness."
"Then I called the old Negro woman I had to take care of me. She put a few clothes on me and picked me up in her arms and carried me over to the church. When I got there, I asked the preacher to pray for me. During the meeting I realized what a sinner I had been, and I knew that if I did die that night I'd go to hell. I knew then that I'd never been a Christian and that my faith had been weak. When we got through praying and I got up off toy knees, my feet had been straightened. I could walk the same as anybody. On that Monday night the Lord had healed me, and that's the night I was saved. I had been cured by prayer. Now all the relief I get, I get from the Lord. I live by faith.
"When I got back home that night, the old bogey man, that's what I call him, tempted me. I found my baby awful sick. I told her pa not to send for a doctor, and I just got down on my knees and prayed. I asked the Lord to cure her. By morning she was as well as ever. The Lord had answered my prayer and cured her.
"Sometime later my married daughter was sick, and the doctor said she had double pneumonia. He was giving her all kinds of medicine, but she wasn't getting any better. One night I went over there, and the doctor had just told the family that Annie couldn't live out the night. They were going on something terrible. I quieted them the best I could. Then I went in the closet and got down on my knees, like the Master said, and I prayed and prayed. When I came out of the closet, my daughter was much easier and had fallen asleep. The next morning when the doctor came and found her so much better, he was surprised and wanted to know what I had done. I told him the Lord had cured her. I had just prayed and asked his help."
"Is your daughter, Minnie, a Christian, and does she have as much faith as you?" I asked.
"Good gracious me, that child has more faith than I do. I wish mine was as strong as hers. Minnie used to be a Christian before she started going to picture shows. But she ain't no Christian now. You remember what the Master told the rich young ruler, 'One thing thou lackest.' Minnie will go to moving picture shows, and I think any one that goes to picture shows can't be a Christian."
"Why, Mrs. Holmes, don't you enjoy a good picture show?"
"Deliver me from them. They are not of God, and I won't tolerate anything that is not of God."
Minnie, who was sitting on the tool box, quietly listening, now spoke up to take care of her side of the question, "I really enjoy a good picture, and I go whenever I can. But I hafter sneak away from Me. I tell her I am going up town to buy a pattern or something, but, instead, I go to the show. After I've been in there awhile, I'll see Ma coming down the aisle looking for me. Then I'll duck my head down to hide. She usually finds as and pulls me out."
"Yes, ma'am, Mrs. Holmes added, that's the only time I ever go in the picture place."
Apparently enjoying this recounting of her past and present ailments, Mrs. Holmes continued. "The doctors just patched as up. I was in a dreadful fix. Dr. Babcock treated me for a long time. He said I had pellagra inside and outside. It took everything we could rake and scrape to pay the bills. He made me drink lots of milk and eat vegetables. But the doctors can't care all the time. The Lord has to take a hand in it, and He'll do it when we ask him, but we must have faith."
"Don't you think doctors are good and help us, Mrs. Holmes?"
"Sure, doctors are good. The Lord put then here. If they weren't good, He wouldn't have put then here.
"About three years ago I was real sick again. My faith must not have been as strong as it had been, because I let them persuade me to go to the hospital. The doctors said I had ulcer of the stomach or maybe cancer. I stayed there three weeks. When I was able to some back home, they told as I had to eat something or drink milk every two hours. But I couldn't do that. I got so tired of the milk, and, anyway, I'm not always where I can eat that often. My stomach worries me something terrible. There's such a hollow feeling and misery right here."
To illustrate she pieced her hand on her stomach to show the location of the "hollow feeling and the Misery."
"Mrs. Holmes, I find that so many of the women here in the village use snuff instead of the more modern cigarette, do you use it?"
Emphasizing her denial by pounding her hands on the arms of her chair, she said, "No, indeed, I do not use that stuff. Before I was saved and became a Christian I used it. But the Lord has cleaned me from that filthiness of the flesh and all other filthiness."
"Your husband tells me that he enjoys snuff and has been using it for twenty-five years."
"Yes, he does. That is a sin he must answer for when he goes to meet his God. He hasn't yet been saved and is not a Christian. I can't get him to go the church nor read his Bible. I don't read nothing but my Bible. There's nothing good but the Bible.
"You've been asking me all the questions, now I want to ask you one. Tell me what church you belong to?"
"I'm a member of St. Pauls' Luthern Church, Mrs. Holmes. That's the one on the corner of Bull and Blanding Streets."
"You are? Yes, I know where it is. I'm so glad, for I just love the Lutherans. They are so good. I know Mr. Smith from St. Pauls'. He comes down here to see me real often, and he pray. with me. I tell you he is a good man and I sure love him.
"If it hadn't been for my faith in the Lord I would not be living today. 'The just shall live by his faith.'"
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE:	DELMA TODD CULCLASURE
Date of First	Writing December 16, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Delma Todd Culclasure (White)
Fictitious Name	Susan Jones
Street Address	1202 Ashley St.
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Textile Mill Worker
Name of Writer	Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser	State Office
DELMA TODD CULCLASURE (white)
TEXTILE MILL WORKER
1202 ASHLEY ST.
COLUMBIA, S. C.
Mrs. Culclasure, a woman of medium height and weighing possibly one hundred and fifty pounds, simply but cleanly dressed in a neat cotton print dress and apron, opened the door in response to my rap. In a well modulated and pleasing voice, she invited me to come right into her kitchen where she was making a dress for her youngest daughter and, at the same time, attending to the cooking of the midday meal.
"You must excuse the appearance of the room this morning, for I am so anxious to finish Doris's dress, I haven't put things to rights. We want to go to my son's wedding on Christmas Eve.
"My life story? I've often told the children I'd like to write it myself but I couldn't write it interesting enough for anybody to want to read it.
"Well, to begin at the beginning, I was born in South Carolina, about twenty-one miles from Conway. But we always said we came from North Carolina. Father's little farm was nearer Mt. Tabor, just over the line in North Carolina, and that was our postoffice.
"I don't remember so much about the country, though. Our home had five rooms with a wide passage through the middle, and it had never been painted. We had a big family - ten of us children. Father couldn't make a living on our little place, with only an ox to plow. All he planted in those days was cotton and corn, and cotton wasn't bringing much.
"Father and mother didn't got much education. They grew up during the war, when there wasn't many schools. Mother could read a little but couldn't write. Father went for a short time to a 'hired school' and could both read and write. And us children didn't fare much better. I went through about the fourth grade.
"When I was thirteen, pa decided it would be better to move to a mill town where us children could work. We came to Columbia, and I got work in a weave room at fifty cents a day. But even with us children at work, we had a hard time. And pa wasn't satisfied. He loved to farm and wanted to go back to the country. Then his aunt died and left him a little money. That decided him to go back and start farming again.
"But I had a different mind, and when they had things all set to move, I told them I wasn't going. I was going to marry Charles Culclasure, a boy who worked in the same room with me at the mill.
"We went over to the Lutheran parsonage one Sunday afternoon and was married. Charles said he didn't think it would be nice to live with either family. So we boarded at the same place he had been staying. At that time I was making twenty-four or twenty-five dollars a month, and he was getting thirty. And with our board only five dollars a week for both of us, we could save some money. When our first baby was coming, I stopped working at the mill. Now we have eight children, four boys and four girls.
"And I'm proud of my children. It was only this morning that I wrote Raymond that no one sees him so fine as I do. My husband is proud of them, too. But we have a different view of what children mean. He thinks that, as soon as children are old enough, they should work for their parents. But I think they should be fitted for their life, and I've done all I could to push them along and encourage them, and I've tried not to require too much help from them. The most of our lives is gone, and we should show them, the best we can, how to live theirs to the best advantage. Charles and I didn't have much chance to get an education, but we're sending our children to school and helping then, all we can, to get the advantages we missed.
"Each of the boys had a paper route and made his spending money. Each one sort of handed it down to the next one as they finished high school and went off. Rudolph, my youngest son, kept the paper route until he was ready to go to the University of South Carolina, and then he was promoted to district manager with the Columbia Record. In this way he paid all of his expenses at the university, and we didn't charge him any board. He made preparation to teach, while he was at the university, but he is keeping books for the State Welfare Department now.
"Two of my sons, Harry and Raymond, were good football players and had athletic scholarships at college. Harry finished at Newberry College. Now he is an operator in the card room at the Olympia Mill and was elected manager of the boys' football team."
Just at this time the two younger girls came in from school, and Mrs. Culclasure interrupted her story to ask Alice to look at the rolls in the oven, while she fitted the nicely tailored suit on Doris. Alice, a tall slender blonde of sixteen, is in her second year of high school. Doris, two years younger, is this year completing the grammar school. Both of them are bright attractive girls, both make excellent marks at school and take an active interest in church work.
"My girls have very little time for recreation. They are studying hard at their lessons this year. But they enjoy the moving pictures and go occasionally. I do not care for the shows. While sane of them are educational, so many of them are not. I rather stay at home with my knitting or a magazine or a good book. I have knitted four dresses, three for the girls and one for myself. Then I knitted a slip-over sweater for my husband. The girls and I read together a lot and then discuss the stories. We tell the things we like or what we would have different. Alice says people nowadays went the truth shout things; and I like to get down to the real things. Some things are so shallow.
"It seems like older girls had a worse time than my boys. Mary learned a trade in the mill. She works in the card room. When she was eighteen, she Married James Green, and they both kept right on working in the same room. We have a skeleton in our closet, just like so many other people, but I don't mind telling you about it. James is a good looking boy and likes to use his looks to attract young girls. After they had been married twelve years, James fell in love with one of these girls. And she told him if he would get a divorce, she would marry him. Then he went to Mary and told her that she had gotten too fat and he didn't love her any more; but, if she had had any children, he would stay with her for their sake. He left her and went to Augusta, Georgia, and got a divorce. She grieves all the time, because she still loves him and she feels the disgrace of the divorce. Rudolph, her younger brother, lives with her.
"The next daughter finished high school and, after taking a business course, she did stenographic work. She got married, too, but lived only two years, leaving an infant. And it died in just a little while."
The outside door opened and a slender little man with keen blue eyes and graying hair came in, and I was introduced to Mr. Culclasure. Realizing it must be his dinner hour, I offered to came another day for the remainder of her story. But she assured me that there was plenty of time, as Mr. Culclasure had the whole hour and could eat in the last thirty minutes. While Alice and Doris finished getting the meal ready and set the table. Mrs. Culclasure continued with her story.
"After Charles and I had been married a few years, he felt that he wanted to preach. We were both members of the Baptist Church, but the Presbyterian Seminary gave him a scholarship for two years. While he was studying, getting ready to preach, I stayed at home and sewed for other people and sold milk and helped all I could to bear expenses. He preached in the Missionary Baptist Church for twelve years. There were four churches in his charge. All of the members were poor people and about all they could pay was produce from the gardens and poultry and hogs. But all this time our family was growing and we needed some money; so Charles had to go back to work in the mill. He works in the card room and gets eighteen or twenty dollars a week. Sometimes he preaches now, but not regularly. He takes lots of interest in church work and teaches a class in Sunday School. About nine or ten years age, he and I joined the Pentacostal Holiness Church. Do we talk tongues? Well. we did when we first joined the church, but we don't use it very often. We both feel that we are living a better life, as the rules of living are so strict."
One of these many rules, and one that they make a particular part of their creed, is that they must not speak evil of the absent, nor listen to those who do. Mrs. Culclasure is president of the Ladies' Aid Society. They do a great deal of good among the members of the church, helping the needy with food and clothing.
"My pastor thinks that anyone who is a Christian should be able to make a speech in public. He says I should get up in meeting and make a talk. And I do have the most beautiful thoughts. And when I am here at home, I can plan out things to say. But I just can't deliver it. Not when every one else is sitting down and just me standing up. Now, I don't mind praying in public, and he frequently calls on me. But I don't see the people then. I always kneel, and I'm not talking to them. Some woman at the church told the pastor that ay testimony sitting down was worth more than others standing up. I've had people to say that I always seem so pleasant. And they ask me if everything is always pleasant at home. I tell them no, not always pleasant; but my husband and children always respect my views and I respect theirs. And we have cooperation in the family. I feel that we get along better at home than most families. There are some women so bossy they want to manage what doesn't concern them. I let my husband manage his own affairs.
"Yes, I vote now, but I didn't at first. I was against women voting. I thought it best to let the man be the head. I felt that women had their own place to fill, that a mother's first duty was to the home and the house work. In later years, I saw that some women were more capable of voting than some men. And I began to vote, not because others did, but because I felt we were given the privilege and we should accept it.
"Are there any changes I'd make in living my life over again? I don't know if I'd have any more knowledge about managing. Maybe I would be a wiser woman. But I think I'd not get married so young. I've been happy, but there's such a chance not to be. I think girls should have their teens without minding babies. I've always advised my girls to wait for the twenties. Alice says she wishes I'd pick out a good boy for her. I tell her I can't pick them but I can thin them out.
"The children tease me; tell me that Raymond is my favorite child. They are all my favorites. But he is such a good boy and shows his appreciation for all that his daddy and I have tried to do for him. He had an athletic scholarship at Furnas University, and the president wrote us this letter about him. 'We had no finer boy in Furman than Raymond Culclasure. Because of his character and attitude toward life, and his cooperative spirit, he takes with him the esteem and respect of the faculty, of the administrative offices, and of the entire student body. I congratulate you who are the parents of such a fine outstanding boy. Raymond Culclasure will be heard from out in the world.'
"While he was a student at Furman, he joined the Pendleton Street Baptist Church of Greenville and taught a class of small boys who fairly worshiped him. How he is in the insurance business in New York City. On Christmas Eve, he is to be married to a young North Carolina girl who finished at G.W.C. This week he wrote us a letter telling us how much he appreciates the sacrifices we made for him and gives us credit for giving him such a good start in life. When I wrote him I told him that I felt that I was only doing ay duty and that When I get in a hard place and can't see my way out I just pray.
"I surely am sorry it's time for you to leave. There's some people come in who I don't enjoy talking to, but I have enjoyed your visit and want you to come again."
TITLE:	SALLIE SPITFIRE
Date of First Writing	December 28, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Sarah Taylor (white)
Fictitious Name	Sallie Spitfire
Street Address	1013 Whaley Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Housewife
Name of Writer	Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser	State Office
Mrs. Taylor, a wiry, little, gray-haired woman, whose welcoming smile revealed practically toothless gums, greeted me with the statement that she didn't have much time to talk this morning as the water was already hot for her washing. But when I again baked for just a few minutes of her precious time, she put several pieces of wood in the heater and drew up her two chairs, so that we might sit and talk. Her snappy pale blue eyes danced at the idea of any one wanting to know the story of her life, and, when assured that her true name would not be used, she suggested that we call her "Sallie Spitfire."
"I ain't got much story but just a hard time. You better go to some others in this house. There's plenty living here in this here old barn. Let's see, there's five families upstairs and three downstairs. Most all of 'em have chillum and not much else. I been here 'bout six months. I live 'bout and move when it don't suit me.
"I was born four miles from Columbia, on Quinine Hill, on the Jim Dent place, 'way back in '69. My father and mother was named Le Grande, and they was divorced when I was a little bit of a chap. Then my grandmother took he to raise. Never went to school more than two months in my life, but I can read a little and write my name. My grandmother petted me, and she was scared I'd get hurt going so far by myself.
"There was a young couple, John Taylor and wife, moved into our neighborhood from North Carolina. He was a carpenter. One day his wife died and left him with four little chillum on his hands. After a time, he began coming to our house, and we'd take walks. Didn't have nothing to ride in them days. Then when I was fifteen, we decided to get married. This here Mary Donahue right here was his baby then."
"Yes, ma'am I shore was," said Mary who was sitting on the pile of wood behind the stove. "I shore hated for Pa to git married again. And all the neighbors kept tellin' me not to mind her, because she didn't have nothin' to do with me. Yes ma'am, I shore was a mean youngun. Then when their first baby come, I resented that, because I had been Pa's baby and he petted me. They tried to git me to go to school, but I was too mean to go. I'd tell them to let me stay home and tend the baby, and just as soon as they wasn't looking, I wasn't tending no baby."
"We moved to Columbia," continued Mrs. Taylor, "so he could get more work. He made from a dollar to a dollar and sixty cents a day. I got work in the cotton mill in the spool room for fifty cents a day. We had eight chillun, but there's only one living now. They all died when they was babies. We kept two cows, had plenty of milk and butter, and during war times my husband made as much as five dollars a day. We was living good then - can't live now, and it goes hard. We didn't pay but eight dollars a month rent for a house, and we saved save money.
"My husband had a good education. His brother, the Rev. Thomas J. Taylor, who was a Baptist minister and preached in the same church for forty-seven years, was his teacher. He knew the Bible from lid to lid; didn't miss it. He could tell you where to find any part you'd ask him."
John Taylor died about six years ago. He had not been able to work for several years before his death. As Mrs. Taylor explained, "They set him off his Job on account of his eyes. My eyes is bad how, too, and I shore need glasses."
"Oh mama," chimed in Mary, "I see in the papers where you can git glasses for one dollar down and one dollar --- uh - when they can catch you."
After her husband's death, Mrs. Taylor worked on a Federal project until two years ago when she was cut off as being disabled.
"The doctors downed me; said I had high pressure and kidney. They said I must rest and live longer. But there shore ain't no time to rest, with all this here scrubbing and cooking and washing. And I tell Henry I been splitting so much wood I got it patterned out just right. This is the visitingest house; they starts before breakfast and keeps it up all day."
The presence of three girls in the room, visiting before breakfast, probably provoked the spitting remark. Thus relieved, she continued.
"I'm getting eight dollars and forty cents a month from the old age and has to pay two dollars a month rent for this room. I b'longs to the Broadway Baptist Church, but I don't git to go much. When some of 'em ask me why I don't come, I tell 'em that when I have a dress, I ain't got no shoes, and when I have them, I ain't got no hat.
"I didn't go to school much, and I couldn't get Henry, that's my boy, to go much either. He just picked up 'laceration and bricklaying, and When he works he gets six dollars a day. His wife went off with another man when their little girl was four years old. And I took her."
Bernice, the small granddaughter, was standing by the heater open-eyed and listening with intense interest.
"Henry likes to have a good time, and, when he's got money, he don't remember his mother. He just 'fans it out,' giving the girls a good time. Henry got married again about four weeks ago. They live 'bout four houses right up the street. I tried to raise the chillum the way they should go, but they didn't always go the way I trained them. Those days the younguns are raising the parents."
Just at this time the fire in the heater needed replenishing, and Mrs. Taylor picked out an armful of wood and left the room to split it. While Mrs. Taylor was out with the wood, Mary Donahue told something of her varied experiences.
"Cliff Donahue is my second husband. First, I married Jim Borsh. We knew each other when we was children and then met again after we was grown and working in Granby Mill. Jim was making two dollars a day and I was getting a dollar twenty-five. The first nine years we was married we boarded for six dollars a week. But when his mother was paralyzed, we moved there so I could take care of her. Jim got to drinking real bad and quarreled and mistreated me. He didn't beat me, but he gambled and wasted his money. I got tired of it. So I went to Augusta, Georgia, and got a divorce. That was fifteen years ago. Oh, yes, he got married again, but he got mad when he heard that me and Cliff was going to be married. His mind was off for a long time before he died. He was in the State Hospital for two years and died there last summer.
"Me and Cliff was married four years ago."When he works at his job in the machine shop, he makes eighteen dollars and thirty-five cents a week. When this job runs out, he makes his own job. We got a little cabin, made outer tin and scraps of boards, down on the river, and we go down there and fishes. Last time we was there we stayed two years. One night we got a message that the market wanted a hundred pounds of fish next morning. We got up at midnight, cooked, ate, and went fishing. By daylight, we had caught fourteen dollars and forty cents worth of fish. Sometimes we go to fish at Lake Murray. If we can get ready, we are going out with a carnival in April. That some one that was here during 'Fair' week. Cliff made his plans with the manager then. He calls it a 'grease Joint;' you know, sells hot dogs. I ain't going to have nothing to do with it myself. I'm just going along with him."
Mary Donahue is a tall, gaunt woman with a pale, sailor complexion, high check bones and sunken cheeks. She entered the room eating her breakfast. In one hand she held a great thick sandwich of bread and meat and in the other hand a heavy porcelain cup of strong black coffee. The pewter spoon remained in the cup, which had no handle, all the while she drank.
"The doctor says I have T. B." Mary went on between bites of sandwich and sips of coffee. "Cliff's good to me. He says he's going to boat that old T. B. yet. He makes me rest and drink lots of milk. We have the corner bed room with three windows, so I get plenty of fresh air. Cliff's sixteen years younger than me, and I'll be fifty my next birthday. I'll tell you Cliff is good, man, and bad: but he's cute. He drinks some, too. W-e-l-l, yes, he gets retty drunk sometimes. When he's drinking, he calls mama 'Sook,' and says 'See that old woman Sook? I'm going to live with her yet, if I have to tomp her'."
"Yes, that's my dog. Sometimes I say I'm going to get rid of Buster, but I can't: he's so much company. He's supposed to be a fox terrier, but he ain't no fox terrier. He's just a dog.
"We bought an old second-hand Plymouth the week before Christians. Before that we had a Buick. He has to keep some kind of a car. Sometimes it might be a pick-up, so we can go to the river or lake to fish.
"Shore did vote. But wouldn't have voted if it hadn't been for Johnston."
"Come on, Buster, it's time for us to go scrape out. What do I mean? I mean I got to clean up that room before Cliff gits here for dinner."
Throughout my visit, a pen of dried beans had been simmering on the oil stove, and now the little granddaughter put some in a saucer and, taking several rolls from a package, eat at the small table to eat her belatod breakfast. In the meantime, Mrs. Taylor came in with her armful of wood and excused herself so that she could go on with her washing."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	TRICKED BY GYPSIES
Date of First	1-February-1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Nick & Janie Young (Negroes)
Fictitious Name	Nick & Janie Fuller
Street Address	None
Place	Blythewood, S. C.
Occupation	Farmers
Name of Writer	Helen Shuler
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Janie! Ja-a-nie! Where are you? The only response was the loud barking of two small dogs, as they ran threateningly from the rear of the little Negro cabin. There was no sign of any member of the family at home. But after another call for Janie, aa I backed off from the hostile dogs, I heard the voice of Janie, "Spot! Red! Shot your mouths." Facing the direction of the voice, I saw Janie, about two hundred yards away, emerging from a clump of sweet gum trees.
The hone of Nick and Janie Fuller is five miles east of Blythewood, South Carolina, on the Bear creek road, and one mile to the right of Langford Crossroads. The clearing for the house, possibly a half acre, is in the midst of a cottonfield, about one hundred feet from the road. The weatherboarding of the little cabin shows signs of having been previously used, as some of the boards have been painted a light blue, and all have been discolored by the weather. At the front is a porch still unfinished, haring neither roof nor floor. Several boards have been laid from the steps to the door to permit entrance. The white sandy yard is swept clean. A brown mass of dead leaves, at both sides of the steps and along the edge of the porch, is all that remains of the bright summer flowers. A huge black walnut tree rises high above the top of the house and shades the back doorway from the afternoon sun. Their small barn and stable combined is located some fifty feet beyond the house, to the right. Close by the stable, the pigs are penned comfortably in deep beds of pine straw.
"Please, ma'am, if you don't mind, come over here where I's washin'. I just gotta get dose clothes on de line."
I followed a well-worn path across the brown and dried cottonfield, and found Janie's washroom to be a large bowl-shaped hollow about four feet deep and possibly fifteen feet across, and open on the south side, Scattered about the bowl and along the rim are a number of sweet gun trees. Here she works in comfort, both summer and winter. In the summer, the shade of the trees make it cool; and in the winter, the sides of the bowl out off the cold winds. At the bottom of this bowl is a clear bubbling sparing which furnishes a permanent supply of pure water. The spring itself has been boxed in and covered with new boards, to keep, out the leaves and trash from the overhanging trees.
Janie Fuller, an energetic Negro woman of forty-five years, was busily engaged at her washtub which had been placed on a bench under tree. Over at one side, between her tub and the spring, was the boiling washpot of clothes. I took a seat upon a discarded water trough, which had been out from a large sweet gun tree. On this particular morning, Janie was busy, and, while she had greeted me in a pleasant way, she was in no humor to tell very much about herself. In response to questions, she replied with such non-committal phrases as. "I don't know; 'bout fifteen acres; sometime send some money; ain't much." And, finally, she said, "It seems to me de hard times I's had b'longs to me. It ain't for any one else to know."
But, from other sources, I had already heard of her experience with the gypsies, and, when I asked her to tell me about that, she seemed very willing to repeat the story.
"Dat was de awfullest thing. One day I was a settin' dere in de house just a sufferin' wid my rheumatism, and dese two women and a man drive up to de door. De man waa a-drivin' de automobile, and he ain't crack he mout' to say nothin'. De women come in de house. Dey tell me day can help me. All I gotta do is give 'em a little sumpin'. Dey puts deir arms 'round me and honey me up. Then dey ask me for what little money I has. I ain't mind givin' 'em dat money no more than I mind givin' you dis collar I is washin'. I just hands it out to 'em. When I come to my mind, and dat money and all them other things done gone, it 'most killed me. I ain't know what dey do to me. Dey muster hypnotized me or sumpin'. Dey drive off wid two of my very best quilts what ain't never been on a bed and a brand new dress what ain't even had de scissors stuck in it. I ain't never tell Bub all dey git, 'cause after it's all gone, 'tain't gonna fetch 'em back to tell. Besides all dat forty or fifty dollars and my best quilts and dress, dey take two great big hams what was hangin' in de house. Each one of them hams weighed 'most forty pounds. And, when dey leave, dey say, "Now don't say nothin' to Bub 'bout dis, or you won't git no better.' Then de nasty debils drive right on over to de field where Bub is plowin'. Day tell him day can cure no if he will give 'em twenty-five dollars. Bub say dey rub a little yellow powder in deir hand and say sumpin', he ain't know what. And then day caution him not to tell me.
"Bub say he keep watchin' an every day to see if I's better, and all de time I keep thinkin' maybe I'll be better tomorrow. But, shucks, de pain ain't cased up none, and, anyway, I was sick in my mind 'cause I give away so many things. Then one day Bub say he need some money, and I has to tell him I ain't got no money. Gee! dat was a time. But I shore was glad dat Bub do de seas thing I do; then he can't quarrel wid me.
"Yes, ma'am, dat was de awfullestthing. But de worst part was, dat we done borrowed dat money from de Gov'ment. to buy fertilizer for de crop and feed for de mule. It come in on a Friday, and dese gypsies come in on Tuesdsy mornin'. And we gotta pay dat money back. Dat's what put us behind las' year."
During the recital of her encounter with the gypsies, Janie's little black chinquapin eyes flashed fire, and her hands worked nervously with the clothes, as she hustled from the tub to the washpot and back to the tub again. In her bright-colored print dress, a man's old gray coat, and with a red bandanna tied around her head, Janie, a ginger-colored Negro, looked very much like one of the despised gypsies.
"How old was we when we got carried? Well, let me think. I must've been 'bout seventeen, and Bub (Nick) was most twenty-one. I shore wish you could've seen us marriage. It shore was sweet. Ma made me a white dress and a long white net veil. Miss Langford, she give me a pair of long white silk gloves. And she fix me a big bouquet of white flowers and tie 'em with ribbon. Dere was such a crowd, we had de marriage out in de yard. We put a table under de tree for de cakes. Ma made a cake and load it all over wid white icing. Then some of de people present me wid cakes. All de bridesmids fetch me a cake, too. De crowd stay all afternoon, and, when me and Bub drive off, dey throw rice at us.
"Yes, ma'am, we went right to housekeeping. Bub was hired out to Mr. Wilson, and we went over dere to live. He paid Bub fifteen dollars a month and give us a ramshackle old house to live in."
By now, Janie's mind had been diverted from the idea of telling of her hardships, and she willingly revealed the story of her life with Nick.
"How did you manage to live on fifteen dollars a month."
"We could live very well with me working all de time in de field for forty cents a day. I did anythin' dere was to do on a farm, 'cept plow. I sow de seed, chop cotton, hoe de crop, and put down fertilizer, and do anythin' else dey wants done. Us work four years wid Mr. Wilson and managed to save enough money to buy us a mule and a wagon. Then Bub take a notion he went to rent some land; so we move to Mr. Wall's place. And dat year, we work fifteen acres. He charge us one five-hundred pound bale of cotton. But dat was de first year de weevil was so bad, and we didn't make no cotton to speak of. We didn't have near enough to pay de rent. But Bub bought wood off different places, wherever he could find it, and hauled it to Columbia. He went three days out of every week. He would leave home between one and two o'clock in de morning. On Saddays, I went with him and worked for a white lady in Columbia. She just give me things. I didn't want her to pay me no money. 'cause what she give me was worth more than what de money would buy. When de chillum got big enough, we'd take them with us. Sometimes in de winter it would be so cold we'd have to stop 'side de road and bull' a fire. After we sold de wood, Bub would give de chillum what he aim for 'em to have. You know, you have to 'lowance 'em out or dey want everything dey see.
"Us just stayed dat one year on Mr. Wall's place. Bub decided he could do better to sharecrop. De next three years, we worked on de Lathrop place. Bub had his mule and wagon, and we done de work. Mr. Lathrop furnished de seed and fertilizer. Dese years we did very well. We made plenty of corn, peas, and potatoes, and raised some hogs and a cow. But we had very little money."
Nick Fuller, or Bub, as Janie cells her husband, came in from his work, and, wanting a drink of fresh water, came down to the spring. Nick is a tall, heavy-set, dark-complexioned Negro, with a rich, throaty voice. His attitude toward his white neighbors is friendly yet humble. He is good-natured and industrious and is recognized among both white and black for his honesty. He said;
"I don't want no one to steal even one pea from me, and I don't want nothin' dat ain't mine. I try my bes' to make my chillum do de same. When I find one take sumpin', I use de switch where it do de mos' good."
He has always lived on a farm. His parents were farmers, living over on the Rick's place, and they brought up the young boy to love the farm. His one ambition has been to own his own place, and fortunately, he married a woman with the same hope. Together, he and Janie have struggled, saving every penny possible out of their meager earnings.
After they had sharecropped three years, the wanderlust, natural to the Negro race, made them move again. This time they rented land from Mr. Langford for four years, and each year they paid one five-hundred pound bale of cotton. During all the years, whether renting or sharecropping. Nick continued to out and haul wood to Columbia. As Janie says, "Yes, ma'am, hauling wood is shore in it." Janie, whenever she could, worked in the white folks' kitchens, or helped with the butchering. Both of them are dependable and trustworthy, and they are always in demand when extra helpers are needed.
"Janie, why did you decide to buy this particular farm?"
"Well, while us was livin' dere on de Langford place, Ma was tryin' to pay for dis farm. She had a hard time tryin' to keep up de taxes and gettin' money to make de crops, and she had to borrow some money from us. She give us a Mortgage on de place. Pa had been dead several years, and she had got married again. But her husband didn't take no interest in de farm, and he wouldn't help her. Then M. decided to move to Columbia, and she turned de farm over to us. We had to pay lots of back taxes and pay de other chillum interests. Sometimes I think we'll never git through payin'.
"Missy, dey ain't nothin. like paid yet; "Nick rejoined, "And dis new house, you calls it, ain.t new stall.
"You know, I useta b'long ever here to de Flat Branch Church. Janie, she stick to Round Top. She wouldn't change her church. And she shore showed wisdom, 'cause now dere ain't no Flat Branch. Our parson useta always cone from Columbia on preachin' Sunday. Nearly every time he's come to us house for dinner."
"You might call it dinner, Bub, but many a time "twan't nothin' but bread and meat," interspersed Janie.
"Well, it was sumpin' to eat, and he was nighty glad to git it. Then de members begin to move away. Some of "em jined Round Top, and de few what was left didn't come preachin'. Then he quit comin'. De church was dere not bein' used. So I bargained wid de few members dat was left, and I bought de buildin' for eighty dollars. I borrowed de money, and now I done pay it all back.
"How I pat 'em back? Whenever I could git a day, I worked at de sawmill. And then I helped one and another wid de farm work, and I keep haulin' wood to Columbia. Then Janie she work and help, too."
"I reckon I did help. I sold everythin' I could rake and scrape. Payin' debts and raisin' eleven head of chillum ain't no joke."
"It never cost us so much to buil' dis house," Nick continued. "You see, whenever us friends had a day off, dey just come and help us. Janie would cook something for 'em to eat, so dey didn't haften fetch no dinner."
"Are you still hauling wood to Columbia?"
"No, Missy, you see dat mule old now, and he 'most done. I jus' hope he'll make another crop.'
"Janie, tell me something about your eleven children. Did you send them to school?'
"Dese youngest ones, what's at home now, go to school, but the oldest ones didn't take to books. They'd ruther work on de farm, and we shore needed 'em. Dere's three of 'em up in High Point, North Carolina. Minnie is a nurse and maid for some white folks. Sometimes dey sends me a little money. Little Nick is married, and he works at de sawmill. Arthur works over yonder in de dog hospital and gits five dollars a week. He helps me a little, but can't send much. One girl is married, and de other five are still with us. Me and Nick didn't have no chance at schooling, and we wanted to send our chillum. Dey can all read and write, and dat's more than us can do. We shore had a hard time getting all dese chillum raised. Sometimes dere wasn't too much to eat; and we was glad when de summertime come, 'cause then we didn't need much clothes. De good Lord keep us well, and dat shore helps. Little Janie is de onliest one what had any trouble to 'mount to anything. Her tonsils was bad, and we had to take her to de clinic. Dey claim dey cut 'em out. But I ain't know, 'cause her throat bleeds some yet."
While Janie finished up her washing, Nick, sitting on an upturned water bucket and leaning back against a tree, told me about the farm and his crops.
"Us got one hundred acres in one trac', and forty acres in another. Lordy! No, ma'am, dere ain't but forty or fifty acres cleared. De rest is woods, mostly oaks and street guns and poplar, with a few pines. My crops dis las' pas' year was pretty near all failures, I planted six or seven acres of cotton. But dere was so much rain, and de weevil eat 'em up so bad, I ain't git but one bale. I plant my corn in de bottom lan', 'cause it de richest, and I ain't have no fertilizer. But de rains come and drowns 'em out. Then I had peas in de corn, and, when us pick 'em, dere ain't but six or seven bushels. Since me and Janie give all dat money to them gypsies. I ain't had none to buy fertilizer. And dis flat sandy lan' shore takes a plenty. If I could get steady work somewhere's til time to start de crop, or, if I could git on dat P.W.A., it'd shore help. Taxes is just pilin' up. Dere must be more'n a hundred dollars back taxes, and I just don't see where dey comin' from. And I don't know if I can borrow from de Gov'ment again dis year or no.
"No, ma'am, I ain't never had much time for nothin' but work. Sometime I go coon huntin' wid de white folks. I's de guide, 'cause I know all dese woods 'round here. But I 'member one night I gits all turned 'round, and we gits lost. It's daylight before we gits home.'
"Janie, tell me, did the gypsies help the rheumatism?'
"Help? No, ma'am, dat dey ain't. Right now I got a piece of red flannin pinned across my shoulders. When I wake up dis mornin', I couldn't hardly git my head off the pillow. Dey shore never done me no good."