Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
CHESTER COUNTY
JUDGE J. H. YARBOROUGH
(white)
82 YEARS OLD
James Henry Yarborough, Probate Judge of Chester County, South Carolina, is serving out his second term of four years. He is a candidate for re-election in the democratic primary this summer to begin his third term, Jan, 1, 1939. His office is in the courthouse at Chester, S.C.
"Well, old fellow, if you are going to write something about me, I want you to start off by saying that in my long life I have never been worth, in dollars and cents, about my liabilities, as much as one hundred dollars.
"I am descended from the earliest settlers around the Jonkinsville and Monticello sections of Fairfield County. My father was William Burns Yarborough, a lover of nature, stars, flowers, birds, and trees. He was full of sentiment and high ideals, but he was not very practical in looking after and increasing his substance of material things. My mothers, before marriage, was Elizabeth James, but I hasten to assure you that she was not related to Jesse James, the bandit, nor his family.
"I was a tousled-head boy when the Yankees reached Jenkinsville and our old home, after crossing at Freshley's Ferry on Broad River. The invading army confiscated everything, such as corn, wheat, oats, peas, fodder, hay, and all smokehouse supplies. My recollection is that they came in February, 1865. I was then a freckled-face boy nine years old, and I fought like fury to retain about a peck of corn-on-the -cob that the Yankee's horses had left in a trough unconsumed.
"I remember, too, how grief stricken I was when a Yankee soldier killed my little pet dog. He had a gun with a bayonet fixed on the muzzle. He began teasing me about the corn. The little dog ran between my legs and growled and barked at the soldier, where cupon with an oath the soldier unfeelingly ran the bayonet through the neck of the faithfully little dog and killed him.
"When that cruel war was over, it would have been wiser had the whites and ex-slaves been left to their own resources and invention, to work out their future welfare. There was no lack of affection or loyalty on the part of the Negro, nor was there a lack of love and an enlightened appreciation of self-interest upon the part of the whites. Things might have been different if suffrage had been granted gradually. But with immediate equal suffrage, or the right to vote, came the carpetbagger with his preachments of social equality and the tantalizing hag of tricks to get for every Negro 40 acres of land and a mule. The Negroes were credulous and credulous and believed all the absurdities the knaves told them. The result was an inevitable curse for the Negro and lots of trouble for the white people. It ended only when Hampton was elected in 1876. Hampton is still my hero and a man of greatest worth in the annals of South Carolina.
"I went to school at the Old Broad River Academy. At that time I was only a boy in my teens, but I wore the red shirt in the parades of the Hampton movement.
"At this period of my life, my Jonkinsville companions and I had never been around much. A visit to the county seat, Winnsboro, was a great event in our lives, and we regarded a visit to Columbia and State Fair then just about like you or I would look upon a visit to London or Berlin now. I remember, with intense amusement, when Alley McMeekin, Glenn W. Ragadale, Henry Parr, Charley Chapell, and myself, all county bumpkins, went to the State Fair. While on the grounds, we smoked Virginia Cheroots continuously. We attracted attention, I tell you! As we passed a coterie of well dressed distinguished gentleman, of the character of Col. Richard Singleton, we were asked where we lived. Alley McMeekin was the most talkative one of our crowd. He removed the chreroot from his mouth, lifted his hat, and with a low bow to the sedate gentleman, replied, 'Sir, I live about 300 yards from Uncle Joel McMeekin's springs.' We teased Alley about this piece of grandiloquence forty years afterward. Poor fellow, he died last summer.
"The next place I went to school was Furman University, Greenville, S.C. Leaving there, I taught school at Spring Hill, Lexington County, next, at St. Johns, in Newberry County. School teaching is a more or less quiet existence, and, to better my physical being, I went to Leona, Texas. But cow punching was too strenuous, so I returned to Jonkinsville and accepted a clerkship with Jno. S. Swygert & Co., at Dawkins, S. C. At night, while holding this position, I borrowed law books from my friends, E. B. & C. W. Ragsdale of the Winnsboro bar, read law, and was admitted by the State Supreme Court to practice the profession the year of the earthquake, 1886.
"I soon lost interest in law and tired of trying to save the hides of criminals and of acquiring dubious settlements in civil cases for more or less selfish litigants. I felt a call to the ministry and went to the Theological Seminary at Louieville, ky. Having attained my degree in theology there, I received a call at once to the Little River Baptist Church in Fairfield County.
"One of the most beautiful spots in my memory is the ten spot with a golden background that Mr. William D. Stanton gave me after I preached my first sermon. I labored in the ministry forty-five years and found it rich in spiritual compensations.
"I married Lily Ines Harden. Our children are Mrs. J. A. Riley, whose husband is head of the Sand Hill Experiment; Mrs. E. H. Presley, whose husband is associate professor of astronomy in the University of Arizona; Dr. James H. Yarborough, Jr., veterinarian, in Miami, Florida; Mrs. D. J. Leelie, Rock Hill, S. C.; W. G. Yarborough, Assistant County Agent at Edgefield, s. c.; and Mrs. S. H. Harden, Jr.
"Our neighbors, before and immediately after the War Between the States, were the Stantous, the Rabbs, the Alstons, the Piersons, the Glenns, and the Ragadales. There was a great deal more visiting among county folks then than there is nowadays. And visiting then meant an all day of it. A man would have his carriage and take his whole family to visit a neighbor. You asked me about the children? Oh, you see there was no public school. Usually rich folks had tutors in their homes. The tutor was left in custody of the home, but the children were usually taken on the visit. On arrival the ladies and children were conducted to the parlor and the men into the dining or sitting room. Wine and cake were served in the parlor, and a decanter of brandies was passed around in the dining room.
"After such reception, the man mounted horseback and rode over the plantation on an inspection of the crops and methods of cultivations. The guest was supposed to observe and make suggestions of improvement and tell of the methods he had tried and found successful on different kinds of solis. While the host and his male guest were thus occupied, chickens were being slain - never less than six - in the kitchen. Suspended in the wide fireplace in the kitchen was a large iron pot in which was boiled a sizable, well-cured, county ham. This was the prerequisite of a sumptuous plantation dinner.
"On the dinner table, one could always expect a ham, two plates of fried chicken, a large chicken pie, vegetables of the season, a pan of candied sweet potatoes, rice, and several different kinds of pies and custards. The dessert most likely served was boiled custard and pound cake. Layer cake, I don't remember. I think it came into vogue after the war.
"Yes, sir, great changes have taken place in family life since my youthful days. Parents were more revered then, and they also exercised more anthority. Women occupied a more elevated sphere. A boy had to get permission from the parent before he could pay his addresses to a girl. This would give the father a chance to inquire about the fitness of the young man who was aspiring to be his son-in-law.
"Our slave quarters were substantial log houses. They had two rooms, with a chimney in the middle, and two windows that were closed against rain or wind by wooden shuttare on hinges. Slaves were humanely treated and well fed and clothed. They received the same medical treatment as our family and by the same physician, Dr. David Glean.
"By the way, Dr. Glenn was a noble man. He was married three times. In those days married women had very little rights in regard to property. When a woman of property married, the property became the husbands. Dr. Glenn married Miss Sarah F. Mobley, a daughter of a rich planter, John Mobley. When she died, Dr. Glenn returned the property to her father, even to the jewelry and trinkets.
"Churches were the centers of social influences and the standard of moral excellence and good citizenship in my youth. Roads? In rainy weather they were impassable. In dry weather every traveler had a linen duster to slip on over his or her clothes to keep off the dust of the highways.
"The great man of my youth were Dr. J. C. Furman, Dr. James H. Carlisle, Dr. Moffatt Grier, and Prof. Means Davis, all leaders in education; General John Bratton as a soldier and private citizen; and General Wade Hampton as the State's political redeemer.
"I can't tell you about how ladies dressed in those days. It was a question then and a mystery now, how they got about in any comfort or pleasure. A young man in those days, to be in the swim, must have a horse and buggy, a long-talied broadcloth coat, a white or buff vest, a pair of French calfskin boots, coatings not less than $16.00, and a pair of kid gloves. To be real swell, all this was topped by a tall, shiny, beaver hat.
"I conclude by saying it was a shame in those days for a man to part his hair in the middle or shovel food in his mouth on the end of his knife blade."
Project #1655
W.W. Dixon,
Winnsboro, S. C.
ALICE BUCHANAN WALKER
82 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Mrs. Alice Buchanan Walker is a cultured gentlewoman, a widow, who resides in a handsome two-story house on South Congress Street in the town of Winnsboro, South Carolina.
"I am a lineal descendant of Thomas Woodward, the regulator mentioned in the Colonial accounts of the early history of the State under the royal charter. Captain Woodwood was Captain of Rangers in the Revolutionary War. My grandmother was Anne Wyche Williamson, a <text not clear> of Colonel Thomas Taylor, who figured prominently in the early history of the State. The late circuit judge, Osmond W. Buchanan, was my eldest brother. My father, Dr. Robert Buchanan, married Rebecca Woodward, and I was born in Winnsboro, S. C., June 20, 1856.
"I learned the alphabet and how to read in our home at my mother's knee. My first school attendance was in a private school taught by Mr. & Mrs. Josiah O'Bear. Mr. O' Bear was the rector of St. John's Episcopal Church on East Liberty Street, Winnsboro. I next attended the school for young girls, taught by Mrs. Catherine Ladd in the old Priscilla Ketchin brick house still standing on Congress Street and now used as an apartment house. Later, I studied Latin and methematics under a very rough teacher, Mr. Benjamin Rhett Stuart. I attended Columbia College and was graduated at this institution, taking first honor in the literary department and in music. Professor Samuel Jones was president of the college when I was graduated. For years afterward, I was invited to play at commencements and to assists in the school plays and charades.
"My parents did not permit me to see the Yankees nor anything of the confusion in the caused by Sherman's 'bummers', but the glars of burning homes and the sky-piercing flames from St. John's Episcopal Church awed and terrified me greatly.
"Twelve hundred slaves followed the Yankee army from this locality under the belief that they were to be given forty acres of land, a mule, and a milch cow. In crossing over to the Lancaster County side of Catawba River on flat boats and rafts, many of these Nagroes were drowned. Many found their way back, naked and half dead from cold and hunger. All our slaves went off under this delusion except two Negro boys, Hanry and Reason. The Yankees had killed or driven off every animal on my Grandfather Osmond Woodwad's a place, except three cows and one old horse. They destroyed all vehicle but a rockaway. Reason and Henry promised to do the milking, till the garden, and peddle the milk, butter, and vegetables with the old horse and rockaway vehicle, if allowed to stay on. I have kept the old kitchen table that they made. It has been repaired once or twice but it still stands and is in use in my kitchen this morning. I would like for you to see it. Both Negro boys grew to manhood. Reason stayed here and became a good carpenter, but Henry moved to Arkansas.
"Among the young ladies of my society and set were the daughters of Col. James H. Rion, Kittie, Floride, and Maggie Rion, Deborah Wolfe, Annie Beaty, Sallie, Hattie, and Annie McMaster and Ella, Lill, and Marion Elliott.
"You ask about the style of dres? The old hoop skirt was before our day, but corsets and bustles were worn. White was the prevailing color for hose, and we wore black shiny slippers with moderately high heels. The head dreas? The hair was worn high on the head, on a chignon. Earnings in the cars and game in the hair were part of an evening dress.
"Hats? We were partial to the flat, wide-brimmed, leghorn hats. A wreath of flowers encircled the top of the brim and long streamers or bands of ribbon floated from the sides and could be tied under the chin. The winter hats were more gorgeous. They were trimmed with ostrich plumes and feathers. There was a hat called 'white chip hat', which was adorned with bright colored feathers. Girls and ladies wore more jewelry than, than nowadays.
"Nearly all elderly women had an outdoor bonnet made of gingham cloth, with splints in it to hold its form and to keep it from flapping down over the eyes and face. All the girls in our set rode horseback. They wore a riding habit. The back part of it came down to cover the saddle, and the skirt part was a guarantee that her male escont would never get a glimpse of the hosiery covering her lower extremities. A riding party was a gay party, and sometimes we secured Major Woodward's pack of hounds and went fox hunting with the men.
We had many dances in the Thospian Hall on Washington Street. Jazz music had not come into favor when I was young. The big apple, the Charleston, the fox-trot, and the two-step were unheard of in my generation of fun and frolic. The polka, the gallop, and the walts are what we learned and enjoyed at our dances.
"The boys in our set, as I remember them, were T. W. Lauderdale, J. F. McMaster, Creighter McMaster, Willie Calhoun, Preston Rion, and my husband, David V. Walker.
"On the 2d day of May, the Gordan Light Infantry always gave a prize drill and picnic. There were speaking and the presentation of prices. That night the annual military ball was given. This was the social event of the year. Many visitors from Columbia and the surrounding town attended.
"Mrs. Ladd's school for girls gave many concerts. I remember I sang "Buttercup in Pinafore' at one of the concerts.
"Visiting? There was much more social visiting in my girlhood days than at the present time. People from the town visited such homes in the country as Major Wooward's and Mr. E. P Mobley's and General E. G. Palmer's at Ridgeway.
"One of the visits the Rion girls always looked forward to with keen pleasure was a visit to the home of Dr. Baruch, in Camden. On these visits to Camdem, we saw the splendid exciting horse races. We also attended a ball, where we made many acquaintances and friendships. Some of these friendships have endured throughout the years.
"Yes, freckles were the terror of many a girl's social days. A girl whose skin was susceptible to these little turkey egg dots, washed her face every night in buttermilk and wore a gingham bonnet out in the yard. Her hands were ever encased in gloves, however hot the day. Yes, all women and girls carried a smelling salts bottle with them. I think the affection went out style about thirty years ago.
"Women were sometimes worshipped for the abundance and length of their hair. It was a custom to save every strand as it clung to the teeth of the comb, and, when the strands became sufficient in number, a switch was made of them and replaced in the coils of the living hair.
"Courtesy and gallantry of men toward girls and women? Now let's see if there is a real lack of it nowadays. If so, let's try to discover the contributing causes. What you complain about may be a superficial appearance rather than a deep rooted intentional dieregard of the difference of sex. Aristocratic society before and after the war was composed of planters, lawyers, physicians, and the clergy; bankers were next admitted. Shop keepers or merchants came later. This society got its ideas from Scott's novels. Women were ever on a pedestal and would have remained there forever had not Don Quixote been written; women suffrage came about; the public school system established; and coeducational facilities provided. Again the industrialization of the State, cotton mills, women bookkeepers and stenographern make the old style of gallantry abound and out of date. But, wherever and whenever the girls is worth it, there still abides, deep down in the heart of every gentleman, the same chivalry of the female as it existed in the days of Sir Walter Scott and his Ivanhoe."
Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
JOSEPH STEWART
(white)
81 YEARS OLD.
Joseph Steward is an old bachelor living alone in a four-room frame house on the south side of highway #34, seven miles east of the town of Ridgeway, S. C. He is five feet ten inches tall and weights two hundred pounds.
"I was born near Mitford, not far from Great Falls, January 17, 1857. I was a boy seven years old when the great War Between the States ended in the triumph of the Union army, the abolition of slavery, and the raiding of our section of the county by Sherman's soldiers.
"My father was Thomas Steward; my mother, Sallie Steward. I had two brothers and two sisters. Jane, who never married, is dead. Tom was a bachelor all his life; he was drowned at the age of seventy. Brother William married and had a large family, but died several years ago. Mattie Lavinia married John Haynes. She is still living at Ridgeway, S. C., with her daughter, Mary, who married Bob Ameen, a prosperous merchant and land owner of Ridgeway and Winnsboro, S. C. She is seventy-seven years old. She lost her only son, Harry, last April.
"My father and mother were not rich people before the abolition of slavery; they owned only a few slaves and a small tract of land near Mitford. The destruction of the small cotton mill, the distilleries, and tanyards meant more to my family than the abolition of the slaves.
"My two brothers, William and Tom, and I were not ashamed to work at whatever we could get to do around the cotton mill and gristmill, distilleries and tanyards. Our labor was intelligent and skilled, and was preferred to Negro labor after freedom. So the result of the war bore not so hard on our family.
"Sherman's troops burned the achoolhouse near us. It was a private school of the neighborhood. I had gone to it one year and had gotten to the "baker" column in the old blue-back speller, and had learned to read and write. That is about all the achooling I ever get. What I know has come from the school of experience and in reading the newspapers.
"The Yankees burned burned Mt. Dearborn Cotton Mill, which was owned by Captain seen McAlilley at the time of the invastion by the Federal army. They also burned and destroyed Gaydon's Montgomery's, lewia'a, and Gaither's tanneries. These were never reestablished, but the two distilleries in the community that were likewise destroyed were afterward rest ored, and every store sold whiskey. A gallon jug could be bought for a silver dollar, and a barrel, thirty-one and one-half gallons, sold for a ten dollar bill. Now the same quality and amount of liquor would cost six dollars a gallon and not less than fifty dollars a barrel.
"What was the pastime and amusement of men in those days? Well, society had a distinct cleavage. There was a religious crowd who took things seriously and went to church every time the church had anything going on. They got up and established a temperance society, and attended revivals in the summertime. They led on by the preachers, believed in hell fire and brimatone, and talked against card playing, dancing, gambling, and many innocent amusements that is considered all right nowadays.
"Then there was the other crowd; they raised game chickens and race horses; kept fox hounds; and played cards cards in barrooms and hotels at Winnsbore and Chester.
"The race course ran parallel with the Rocky Mount road. Colonal Whittaker, Major Barry of York, the Hamptons of Richland, the McCarleys of Winnsboro, the Thompsons of Union and the Harrisons of Longtown raced thoroughbred race horses on this track, or course, and much money was won and lost at these races. The chicken fights were sometimes fought in Chester and sometimes in Winnsboro. I have know as much as $500 to be bet on the "Main." That is to say, the side winning the most fights would get the $500. But I have seen $300 bot on an individual cock fight that didn't last a minute; a blue-breasted, red, game cock of Mr. Pagan'a ran his gaff clean through both eyes of an Allan Round Head, game rooster. Who did the Allan Round Head belong to? I'm not sure about that, but the money was put up by three Chester people.
"As to gambling at cards, most of that took place in a back room adjoining the barroom. In the daytime, the game was seven up and turn trump. If you turned a jack, that counted "one". The points to be made were "high", "low", "jack", and the "game". No great cume of money were lost or won on this game.
"At night in the fall and winter the card game was "draw poker" in the town hotels. Generally a bar with liquors was fixed up in the hotel. One day a fine old gentleman stopped his wagon, which was loaded with four bales of cotton, in front of the Nickolson Hotel, in Chester. He came in just to get a drink, he said. Looking around, he saw a card game going on; he joined it, played a while, and had the game changed to draw poker. He soon lost what money he had, and then bale by bale the cotton was lost. In the midst of a conversation about putting up a mule, his son came in and led him out of the hotel. The grandson of that old gentleman is a lawyer at Barnwell, S. C. You know him well, as he has been president of the State Bar Association.
"Dr. Ira S. Scott, a graduate of the Charlestion Medical College, was the physician of the surrounding country. His practice extended from old Backhamsville to Kershaw. In typhoid fever cason, people believed him more able to been a cripple since childhood, and, because of this misfortune, he always rode horseback on a lady's sidesaddle. You remember that, until the year 1900, it was regarded as immodest and shameful for ladies to ride astride as men do.
"The first Saturday in May found everybody in wagons and buggies on their way to the picnic at Catawba Falls, as it was communly called in those old days. Now the place is a large town, a manufacturing centre, is called Great Falls. I have heard old people say that this picnic began as an annual social gathering in 1784.
"Some of the Confederate soldiers who went out from our section were J. F. Arledge, Robert Ford, E.t. Gayden, Sam Kilgo, R. M. Ford, H. J. Gayden, Mansel Hollis, James G. Johnstone, J. F. Nichols, Dr. Willian Dye, John Cartledge, and L. M. Ford.
"Dr. William Hall was the richest man in the neighborhood. He built, at his own expense, Bathesda Church and gave it to the Mothodist Episcopal denomination. Some of the preachers who went out from Bethesda were John R. Pickett, Phillip Pickett, and James Kilgo. Mr. Kilgo had three sons to enter the Methodist ministry. John Kilgo, one of the sons, became president of Trinity College, now Duke University, Durham, N. C.
"Our family moved here to the longtown section of Fadrfield County about 1834, and bought this farm upon which I have lived ever since.
"I think Fairfield was one of the nine countries declared to be in rebellion against the U. S. Government in the days of Ku Klux, but no great disturbances took place here no far as I recall. I took part in the Red Shirt brigades that did so much to elect Wade Hampton governor in 1876. I were a red shirt in the parades and did what I was commanded to do by General Bratton, Major Woodward and the leaders. The club members, on the day of a speaking in Winnsboro, dressed in red shirts, mounted on horseback, and rode to Winnsboro in military formation. I have heard that they did this in every county.
"On the day of the speaking here, I supposed there were at least three thousand red shirts on the speaking ground. It was a grand aight, it pus heart in the whites and dread in the blacks.
"At other elections, before this, Negro women would dress up in man's clothing and vote. How many, I don't know, but we did catch one at Ridgeway, in 1876, trying to vote for Chamberlain for governor. We were on the lookout for them, and they must have gotten scared and made no attempts, except this particular one.
"Women of the Negro race more violent in the abuse of the Democratic Party than were the Negro men. It was common for the Negro women to threaten their husbands with separation if they voted the democratic ticket under persuasion of the whites. These women were advised, encouraged, and urged by the Negro preachers and white scalawag politicians to assume this manner and take this drastic section toward their husbands in order to hold them in line for the radical party at the election box."
Project #1655
W. W. Dixon
Winnsboro, S. C.
DR. SAMUEL B. LATHAN
96 YEARS OLD. (WHITE)
Dr. Samuel Boston Lathan is the oldest white citizen of Chester County, South Carolina. He lives with an unmarried daughter, Miss Susie Lathan, in a handsome two-story residence on Saluda Street, near the U. S. Post Office in the town of Chester, S. C. He owns the place and is one of the outstanding citizens of the community. By reason of strength, he has attained the Biblical allotment of four score years and ten and exceeded it by sixteen years, yet, from the erectness of his carriage, the texture of his skin, and the timbre of his voice, one would never think that he was a man of that age.
"Well, it will give me pleasure to talk to you of what I remember of life from 1848 to 1938. You know I can't remember when I was born, but that event was recorded by my mother as having taken place on the 2d day of May, 1842, about three miles southeast of Blackstock, S. C., in Fairfield County. My father was a farmer, Samuel M. Lathan. My mother before marriage was Martha Patterson. The result of this marriage was five boys and six girls. I suppose the most distinguished one of the family was my older brother, Robert, born in 1829. He received his education at Erakino College, became a teacher, a school commissioner of York County, and a minister of the Gospel in the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church. His son, Robert, was editor of the Charleston News & Courier and, lather, of the Asheville Citizen.
"I began my education in an old field school near our home, taught by Mr. William Douglass. I was six years old then. All small children commenced in the old blue-backed speller. Beginners paid ten dollars per scholastic year of eight months. When we reached the grammar grades, the tuition was fifteen dollars, In the advanced grades, including Latin and Greek, the tuition was twenty-five dollars. The school hours were from 8 a.m. until 6 p.m. There was an intermission of one hour for dinner and recreation. We carried water from a nearby spring. On a shelf in the schoolroom was a wooden bucket containing drinking water. A drinking gourd hung on a nail above the bucket. It was quite a privilege to get privilege to go the permission to go the spring for a bucket of fresh water during school hours. Our teachers was a Presbyterian and believed in the proverb, 'Spare the rod and spoil the child,' The people of the community had great confident in his learning, probity, and executive ability. Usually a whipping at school was followed by a sound thrashing at home, for good measure.
"At recess the large boys played catball. and the younger boys and girls played antony-over, marbles, and rolly-holey. April the 1st was dreaded by most rural school teachers. The pupils would get inside and bar the teacher out. The teacher, who didn't act on the principle that discretion is the better part of valor, generally got the worst of it. Mr. Douglass soon learned this, and, on April Fool's Day, he would walk to the school, perceive the situation, laughingly announce there would be no school until the morrow, and leave. Our teacher required all pupils to study out loud. There was a pandemomium of splken words going on all day in the school. Why did he require this? Well, it was to assure himself that no student was listlessly looking on his or her book and that everyone was busy. Every Friday afternoon we had a trapping spelling bee from the blue-backed speller. In this school we studied Smith's Grammer, Goff's Arithmetic, Morse's Geography, and Peter Parley's History. On the first Saturday in May, the school children went, in wagon, to Great Falls to a picnic and seined for shad. The Cataw a River teamed with shad in those days.
"The Fourth of July was observed at Caldwell Cross Roads. The military companies of infantry would assembly here from the surrounding countries making up a brigade. A dill and inspection were had, and a dress parade followed. There was an old cannon mounted on the field. The honor of firing it was asaigned to Hugh Reed, who had been in the artillery of Napoleon's army at Waterloo and afterward emigrated to South Carolina.
"A great barbecue and picnic dinner would be served; candidates for military, state, and national offices would speak hard liquor would flow; and each section would present its 'bully of the wood's in a contest for champion in a fist and skill-fight. Butting, bitting eye gouging kicking, and blows below the belt were barred. It was primitive prize fighting. I recall that a man named McGill won the belt. He was beaten the following year by Smith Hardern.
"After crops were laid by, a great deal of visiting took place among neighbors. The men inspected each other's crops and sumptuous dinners and watermelon feasts were exchanged. There was more neighborliness in the country then now. Everybody went to church on the Sabbath, and children knew by rote the Shorter Catechism. Nearly every home in our community had family worship night and morning.
"There's something I now call to mind as strange. Funerals were never conducted inside of the churches. The ceremonial rites took place at the grave.
Yes, I am a surviving Confederate soldier. I was a member of Capt. W. C. Beaty company, in Governor John Hugh Means' regiment. I was wounded in the battle of South Mountain (Antietam). I was carried a prisoner of war to Baltimore. That was the conclusion of so much that was important in my military career.
"When I was a boy, my home town was Black stock, named for its first postmaster, Edward Blackstock. The boundary line separating Chester and Fairfield Counties runs through the center of the town. Sometimes the post office is in Fairfield end sometimes in Chester. Now the line runs right through the post office, Kennedy's store. I have lived through the following wars in which my country has been engaged. The Mexican War, the War Between the States, the Spanish-American War, and the World War. I have been a constituent of the following Congressman. W. W. Boyce, W. H. Perry, A. S. Wallace, John H. Evins, J. J. Hemphill, T. F. strait, D. E. Finley, Stanyarne Wilson, Joseph Johnson, W. H. Stevenson, Gen. John Bratton, Paul McCerkle, and the present one, J. P. Richards.
"I do not consider the military occupation and rule of South Carolina, just after the Civil War, unwise or oppressive. The country was demoralized. Disbanded soldiers, Confederates and Federals, passing through the State would have raided the homes of the residents and taken off every mule, horse, and ox, and left them without means of tilling the soil. The provost martial of this district was Capt. Livingston. I never joined the Ku Klux. Yes, there were shortages of food and clothing during the war. Molasses was a substitute for sugar; parched meal and parched ground okra seed were used for coffee; and sassafras roots were used to make tea. Flour and meal sacks were made into men's women's and children's clothing.
"The radical, carpet hag, scalawag government was inconceivably rotten and corrupt. An executive pardon could be bought and stealing were put through the legislature by appropriations and issuance of fraudulent bonds. Under the Constitution of 1865, judges were allowed to state and comment upon the facts and to disclose their opinion of what the verdict of a jury should be. This opinion could be and often was bought with money or its equivalent. A wealthy litigant had three chances, a bribed jury, a bribed circuit judge, and a bribed Supreme Court. A criminal had four chances, the ones I've just mentioned and a bribed governor, who could give him a pardon.
"One of the most interesting political characters evolved in this cesspool of iniquitous politics was Judge T. J. Mackey. Born in Lancaster County, of poor parents, he went with them, at an early age, to Charleston, S. C. native ability, he won a beneficiary scholarship to the Citadel, the military college of South Carolina. He was member of the Palmetto Regiment, end he fought through the Mexican War. In the War Between the States, he was an officer on the Staff of General Sterling Price at the close of the war. When the carpetbaggers and Negroes got possession of the State government, he became a scalawag. Bright, witty, forceful, and with a veneer of good breeding, he was rewarded with the position of Judge of the 6th Circuit, and he resided right here in Chester. He was a conspicuous figure on our streets for years. Solomon in all his glory was no better arrayed. He wore broadcloth Prince Albert coats, silk vests, checked trousers, and tall silk, top hats, and carried gold-headed canes. During court week, he would have the sheriffs attend him with cooked hat and drawn sword, proceeded by the bailiffs crying stentoriously, 'Give way! Give way! The Honorable Court is approaching, He conducted the court proceedings with great pomp, magnificence, and dignity. The suspense of all this dignity was sometime relieved by his wit and humor from the bench. In his inimitable manner he once addressed the grand jury of Fairfield County at Winnsboro in these words.
"Mr. Foreman and gentleman of the grand inquest of the county. In addition to what I have already charged, you might extend your investigations into the hotel and boarding house of Winnsboro and observe the martyrs at their 'steaks,' and also ascertain whether or not certain domestic animals, better known as bedbugs, are entitled to draw pensions from the U. S. Government on account of having draw blood from British soldiers while they were quartered here in the war of the Revolution.'
"On one decision Mr. Lindsay, a reputable citizen of Chester, knocked a drunken Negro politician down and was prosecuted in the court for assault and battery with intent to kill. Mr. Lindsay's attorney approached the judge with an idea of finding out what the sentence would be, provided the defendant would plead guilty, Mackey replied, "You can safely leave the matter to me, sir.'
"When the plea was accepted by the solicitor and read by the clerk, all eyes and oars of the expectant court room were turned on the judge. He said 'Let the defendant Lindsay, stand up. You have been charged in this indictment with an attempt to kill your fellow man. It's not your Mercy that the prosecutor is not lying somewhere today in come silent graveyard. I could impose on you the maximum sentence of fifteen years at hard labor in the State penitentiary, but, as you have saved the State Some expense by your plea of guilty, the sentence of this august court is that you, William Lindsay, be confined in the State Penitentiary at hard labor for a period of ten years (dramat pause) or pay a fine of one dollar."
