Life History.	4500 words
(Date of gathering of material) - 27 April, 1939.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) –Mrs. Bessie Conite, 1017 St.Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Profession of person written about) - WPA worker.
A RED COMB IN HER HAIR
This is the story of Bessie Conite --- five feet, four inches tall, and weighing one hundred and ten pounds, Her eyes are gray-brown, and her glasses seem to bother her a bit. Her hair is short and curled, well grayed, and she wears a port little red comb in it. She has on a red flowered cotton house-dress this day. Her room is on a narrow, wisteria-hung gallery, leafy and cool. You reach it by way of the flagged courtyard --- past the canaries and the mocking bird, and the family of cats and sprawling kittens; and then up a winding, outside stairway. The courtyard is thick with vines and shrubs and borders of spicy flowers.
Bessie’s room is small, and every wall is crowded with furniture. It is a plain, common room, but clean and easy to live in. There are pale green ruffled curtains at the windows and glass doors, and a linoleum rug on the floor. A studio couch with a cretonno cover, some cushions, a cupboard, on armoire, cedar chest, stand, dresser, a rocker and another chair, a two-burner gas-plate on a table --- these make up the furnishings. A little window high above the bed opens like the doors of a dove-cote --- this is where the rain spatters in when it storms.
Bessie turns out the gas under a small saucepan, and settles herself on the couch.
“Yes” she nods, "I've had plenty happen to me --- oh my! I'm a widow --- been a widow for twenty years. I was born May sixth, 1866, two miles from Springfield, Tennessee --- down through the woods, on a little hill, in a log cabin.
"Well, when I was born, I only weighed five pounds and they didn't know who would die first --- my mother or me. They said if I lived to be twelve years old, I'd probably grow up. My mother's name was Sarah Grymes --- full-blooded Irish. She was born in Springfield, Tennessee, too. My father's name was William Henry Hall. He was Irish and English, but he was born in England. I don't know anything about his people at all. He died sudden, when I was two years old.
“Well, after my father died, we lived with my grandparents, the Grymeses. I know that's why I've been lucky --- I was named before I was born. If I'd been a boy, I'd have been Jesse, after my grandfather. But I was a girl, so it was Bessie, after my grandmother. My grandparents had a family burying-ground on the place. I used to call them Old Ma and Old Pa. She always wanted to die when he did. She'd had heart trouble for thirty years, and never had laid in a bed with it. Old Pa died in January, of pneumonia. And Old Ma died just two weeks after, to the day, and was buried in Springfield. And we took him up and put him and her in the same grave. He was ninety-two and she was ninety-one. I was six years old at the time.
"Then my aunt in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, who lived three miles out on the Clarksville Pike, came and got me and my mother. She was Mrs. Nannie Shepherd, my mother's sister. Aunt Nannie lived with her sister. About a month before Mother's Day, in 1934, on a Monday night, I heard a voice say, 'Your Aunt Nannie ain't goin’ to be in this world but a very short while.' I begun to cry. But that Friday she did die, and she had been writing me a letter at just that time on Monday. After that I quit writin' to all my relations---all they want is what they kin git out of you.
“Mammy died the following October, when we went home on a visit to her brother in Springfield --- my uncle, Neil Grymes. I had a half-brother and two half-sisters ---my father's children by a first wife. But I didn't know anything about them. My mother died at forty-three, from change of life.
"After that I lived with my Aunt Nannie and Uncle Shep, until he died in 1911 --- the eleventh of October, it was. Then she and I left Hopkinsville and went to Springfield, Tennessee. She had a little twenty-six-acre place, but she sold it and moved in with her sister. I went back to Hopkinsville and got me a job in the Cumberland Telephone office. I was there about six months, and I got so nervous the doctor said I'd die if I didn't quit. I menstruated all the time I was there.
"Then, after I quit working there, a Doctor Barker's brother-in-law, Gordon Rieves, lost his wife at childbirth, and she left a little boy baby. I had always wanted to be a nurse. Doctor Barker told me if I would come there, he would learn me to be a nurse. I stopped school in the Fifth Grade in Hopkinsville, at the Van Clive schoolhouse, 'cause I've had to work all my life. I stayed in the Rieves’ house about four months ------ thirty dollars a month, room and board and washing, and one day off a week --- to take care of the baby. I quit because I got nervous and all.
"After I left there, I went in to Hopkinsville and got me a job at Kress', and I was there three or four years. Two doctor friends of mine, Doctor Arnett and Doctor Sanback, had several patients that were too poor to hire a nurse. Kress' store would let me off and I'd go and nurse them. They'd give me whatever they could, and I was gettin' trainin’.
"The store manager said me and Katie Redd was the best salesgirls in the store, but he couldn't keep us out of mischief. One Saturday night just before Christmas, just before we went to close, he called me aside. He was only kidding with me, but he says, 'Will you please tell me how you managed to steal that thirty dollars from the woman who claims she lost thirty dollars out of her purse --- ‘cause your cash register had thirty dollars more than anybody else's.’ I used to lead that man a dog's life.
"You see, we had to be there at ten minutes before eight --- had to register. I went in, and by the clock in the office it was ten minutes after eight one morning. The manager asked me if I couldn't see the clock --- 'you know the rules,' he says, 'and you'll lose half a day.’ So I told him that I came in late on purpose, so Icould have half a day off --- but I wanted a whole day off, and could I have it? He told me to shut my mouth and git on the floor. His name was Rainey. Later on he went out; and when he come in he called me on the side and asked me why I didn't tell him our clock was fast. I told him, Because he didn't ask me. I'd know it was fast.
"When I'd been there about a year, we had a special sale on men's silk socks, twenty-five cents a pair, and the manager wanted to know why I hadn't sold more than I had. It was Saturday, and we'd stayed open till nine o'clock. I asked him why he didn't buy half a dozen, and he said he wouldn't wear those things. And I said if he wouldn't, my friends wouldn't, either. So I told him if he didn't like the way I sold socks, I'd quit. He said to wait till Monday night ---- that was pay night. So I did, and I quit. I was only getting three dollars and a half. I roomed with my cousin, and she give me my room and washing for two dollars a week, and I had a dollar and a half left over.
"When I left Kress’ I went to Kline's, a little clothing store … they had everything. I worked in there for two weeks --- I believe I got five dollars a week --- and every time I'd go into Kress’ the manager would ask me if I'd learned to sell socks. I was around twenty-three then. So on Saturday night I quit, and went into Kress’. The manager was out to supper and the girls was all standin’ round talkin’, and I got behind the counter. The customers was all walkin' out, so I served ‘em. Just before he came in, I got on the floor, to keep him from seein’ me servin' the customers. But the cashier told him what I'd did, and the girls all stand in' around talkin' instead of servin’ the customers.
"So Monday I went down and he thanked me for what I did Saturday night. I asked him if he didn't need some help, and he said not regular; but if I'd work steady on Saturdays and Mondays, he'd take me. I told him if I couldn’t have a steady job I didn't want any. That was Monday. He said if he ever did have a steady job, he'd let me know* So on Tuesday he sends Kate Redd after me, to get me to come Wednesday mornin’ because they was havin’ a big lace sale. So when I went in Wednesday he was up in the office; and I went up and asked him if it was a steady Job, because if it wasn't I didn't want it. He told me to shut my mouth and get down on the floor and behind the counter, and when he didn't want me he'd tell me so. I stayed there about three years --- three and a half a week, and it was all they ever paid there.
"He and I had a run-in one night. The big manager from Nashville, Tennessee, was over one night. It was time to git off. The manager had give Kate Redd and I five counters between us, to keep us out of mischief. Our counters wasn't filled with stock yet for the next morning --- we had crockery, glassware, enamel ware, hardware and tin ware, right under his office where he could watch us. When the stock boy brought a basket of plates, I dropped them and broke 'em --- it had made me mad because he had asked me to stay late, just with him and the stock boy. I knew he had other reasons for wantin' me to stay. Of course he bawled me out for breakin' the plates; I told him I'd break the rest of 'em on his head if he didn't shut up. I told him how dirty he was, and that no respectable person wouldn't go out with him. My pal Katie waited in the dressing-room for me. Some of the other girls went into the drugstore and told the drug clerk what I'd been telling the manager. When I came, the clerk give me a five-pound box of candy, 'cause he said I was the first person who ever had the nerve to talk up to that man.
"The next morning I went down after my pay. Him and Mr. Tew was up in the office. Mr. Tew wanted to know why I was quitting, and wanted me to stay. I told him No, I wouldn't give him my reasons, but I was quitting. About six years after that, the Kress manager came into the Nashville Woolworth's, where I was working as floor lady; and he told me if I was still a good worker and still had my temper, he had a store in Chicago and I could have a job with him any time I wanted it. I'd been there in Woolworth's three years. But I didn't go.
“I was married on June tenth, 1915, to George Conite, in Nashville, Tennessee. He was a Captain of the Volunteers of America, and I traveled for quite a while with him after we were married, till my baby died and all. The baby was a girl, and weighed five pounds. She died the day she was six months old. We lived a few months in Cincinnati and in Chattanooga. My husband was good to me, but he had very peculiar ways. He'd go off for months and I didn't know where he was nor nothin'. He's been dead since 1919.
"I came to New Orleans that year --- 1919. I had a letter from the Nashville manager in Woolworth's. I went to Kress' mail order store on Baronne street, upstairs, at twelve dollars a week. I had charge of the return goods. I left there when they closed up the saloons and opened up more restaurants. I decided I could make more working in a restaurant. I guess I was about thirty-five then, and I asked Mr. Rosen if I could work in his restaurant that had been open two or three days. I went to work there at ten dollars a weak, my meals and my tips. Tips were from two to four dollars a day. He sold out to his sister about six months later, and I left. Nobody liked her.
"I'd saved up a little. I went down on Howard avenue at a restaurant, and worked there about two weeks at a dollar a day and tips, and no Sundays off. Seven days a week. Then I was most killed in a streetcar accident. Three stitches in my upper lip and seven in my chest, my knee was cut in two places, and my spine was hurt by the back of the seat. I was flat on my back six months with that. The streetcar Company compromised for fifteen hundred dollars, but my lawyer got five hundred of it. For two years I wasn't able to work, after that.
"The first time I went out of the house after that … let me see. My landlady's husband, on Tulane avenue, worked at the United Fruit Company, and she and I and a couple of friends went in an auto to meet him on the boat. I forgot that my knee was weak, and when I went to get out of the car I fell out --- into a puddle of greasy mud and water. A couple of days after that (we lived upstairs), I went down to the grocery store after a bottle of milk. I fell on the grocery steps, and twisted my foot and broke the ligaments. I spent three weeks in a chair for that.
"Then I got a job in a little restaurant, and I worked there for three years. Seven dollars a week, meals and tips, seven days a week. Then I got a job in Holmes’ restaurant, and I was there three years. In winter, we got eight dollars a week and tips and uniforms. In the summer, one week I'd make about six dollars in tips, and the next -week about five dollars in tips. One day I had only six customers and I made three dollars in tips. But I usually made from three to seven dollars a day in tips.
"I left there and took a month's rest. I went into Maison Blanche one Saturday at one o'clock. I got a Job in the restaurant that day. I was fitted up with a uniform, and I was there three years. I had went from a hundred and forty-five pounds down to eighty-fire, and I was a nervous wreck and had begun to lose my voice. At first I’d got twelve dollars a week, and we furnished our own uniforms and got our meals half-price. No night work and no Sunday work. I only lost one day's work in all the three years, and that was because my foot was swollen. When I left, the only excuse they could give for laying off four of us on Christmas Eve was on account of our age.
"I had a little money saved up, but I was sick. I spent all I had and pawned all my jewelry. I couldn't pay my rent, and the old lady put me out. I went over to Mr. Warrington --- I think that was in 1933. I was there in the Warrington Women's Home in Ursuline street four years --- and I sure worked good and hard there. I got so sick of the food that when I'd come to the table I'd turn away without wanting to eat.
"Well, I managed to get a job uptown --- a housekeeping job. But I was too weak to hold it. I stayed on Rampart street with the same old lady that had put me out, until she put me out again. Then I applied to the Welfare. I wanted work instead of relief. I went to the Social Service --- I was willing to do anything. They put me to work with the Bedding Project, and I'm still there and glad to be. I never have voted, but I have my poll tax now and I'm going to. I think Roosevelt is wonderful --- he's done more than anybody else could. I hope he gets in again.
“Yes, I was christened when I was a baby, in the Methodist church. But that was only because they thought I was going to die. Nobody else in our family was baptized. Now, I love the Catholic Church ---I have ever since was a kid. My husband was a Catholic, but we were married by a Methodist preacher. I loved the Catholic pictures; but my uncle was a strict Protestant and tore up every holy picture he got hold of. When Sunday comes now, I have to sleep. But I sure believe in St. Anthony. I promised him if I got a job I'd give a quarter a period, and I did. When I got a raise, and I'd been asking him to let me get one, I promised I'd give him a dollar a month, and I do. A friend of mine (she's dead now) was a strong Catholic. Every Tuesday I burn a candle to St. Martha for work, and she'll keep my way bright.
"I like to go to a picture show when I can. I have friends uptown, and sometimes I go to spend a Sunday with them. That's about all the entertainment I have, But I found out when I was down and out that your friend was your dollar --- if you haven't a dollar, you haven't a friend.
"There's something else… had a love affair. That was the first sweet-heart I ever had in my life. I was eighteen years old when it happened. I guess I'd have been better off if I'd married him. That was in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. The Holy Rollers, or something like them, had a hall and had these meetings in it Sunday nights. My uncle didn't believe in it, but we all went for curiosity. So, one Sunday night my Uncle Shep carried my aunt and me and two neighbor girls to this meeting. The two girls and myself set in the back, next to the back seat, when we got there. There was three fellows that got to flirt in' with us. The two girls would flirt, but I wouldn't. One of them was a red-headed fellow. His name was Tom Cavanaugh, and he was twenty years old. Every time he'd say something to me, I'd bawl him out. But all the time I was so full of laugh I couldn't keep my face straight. He'd say, 'Doesn't she look sweet when she's mad! If I had her, I'd keep her mad all the time, she looks so sweet!’
"About two weeks after that, I spent the night with my cousin's intended wife, Beuna, and she and I went to the meeting. Tom was there with another girl. But he carried the girl home before the meeting was over, and was to come back to carry Beuna and me home. Before he got back, the meeting closed, and I and Beuna were taken home by another man friend ------ and we met Tom on the way. He just slowed down, and then went on. The next day she went home with me to the country. My cousin wanted us to go to a dance that night out north of town. The father told us we could go if his son could carry us --- but the son, John, was going with another girl. He didn't want to carry us, and said if we was bound to go, he'd drive a mule. He did drive a mule, and we wrapped our heads in heavy old brown cotton veils and went.
"Tom said he know I'd be at the dance (it was a pound party), and he was, and had a pound of candy. When they went to dance, they all got up but he and I. He says, 'Well, that leaves you and I, and nobody never did tell us who each other was. But we'll dance anyhow!' That night we brought him home--- with the mule. Then we went together for about two years and a half; we were engaged for about a year and a half. My uncle didn't want me to marry Tom, although he didn't have nothin' against him. So we thought we'd wait till I was twenty-one. Then he got to keepin' company that I didn't like, and we had a few words because I wouldn't run array and get married. My uncle had told me I couldn't ever come in the house again if I run away, and I wouldn't do that.
"Then a girl from Indiana came down there, and she wasn't what she should be. Tom called me on the 'phone and told me he and this girl was goin' to get married, thinkin' I'd make up with him. I told him I could stand it if he could, and to go to it. And he married her. Not two months after he was married, he sent a friend to ask if I wouldn't make up with him. He said if I would, he'd get a divorce and marry me. I sent back word that he'd cut off his nose to spite his face, and he could stick to it. He told his wife I was the only one he loved, and that any day I said so he'd get a divorce and marry me. He was drinkin', too.
"After my husband died, I was in Nashville, Tennessee. Tom had a gentleman friend come and tell me he was dying with the TB, and wouldn't I like to see him before he died. I told him to tell Tom I wanted to remember him as he used to be --- he was a changed fellow since he'd been married. I guess we spent about twelve years apart; and then I wrote to Beuna and asked her if Tom had ever died with the TB. He happened to be in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, at the time, and he told her to tell me No, that he was very much alive. And that's the last I ever heard of him. He didn't have the TB at all. His brother Pratt used to always say to me, ‘Aw, Bessie, why don't you take me? One of the name is as good as the same.' He's still an old bachelor.
"There's been one puzzle to me in my life. What the doctors said. Why is it, I've been so near death so many times, and yet I'm still here. They must be leavin' me here for some good cause in my old age.
"Now I've got carbuncles, and one eye is bad, and I broke my false teeth, and I’ve got red blotches on my hands and behind one ear. I think it's eggs--- I ate an awful lot of eggs for a while, and I thought they'd be good for me; but I guess I ate too many.
"Well, I've always been full of the devil --- I was born full of the devil. I'd rather be here in this room by myself, than with anybody, and the landlady's awful good to me. I used to be with Mrs. Clerk and her two kids. But she cooked things that weren't good for me to eat, and treated me lots wores than I treated her. This is a big old house, and it's quiet and nice, and my room's like home to me. I guess that's what we all want most of anything, when we begin to get older … home. Work and home. And if I make out that this room's home, I've got them both."
LIFE HISTORY 5200 words
(Date of gathering of material) 4May, 7 May, 15 May, 16 May, 1939 & 18 May.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) - Eugene Reuben Mumford, 2519 Alvar St., New Orleans, Louisiana. (Colored)
(Profession of person written about) - Fruit and vegetable vendor in French Market.
URANUS AND I AREPRETTY GOOD FRIENDS ...
Eugene Mumford ------ his middle name is Reuben --- is a mulatto. We in Louisiana call people of his complexion "bright" negroes. In the Old French Market, where he works, his manners are perfect --- gentle, deferential, quiet, selecting the reddest tomatoes and the whitest celery and the biggest peaches for the customers he has been serving so long. If he happens not to be around, and you ask for him, at once a hue and cry is set up by the noisy Italians who swarm about the old Market today. "Yaller!" they shriek. "Yaller! Somebody wants ya!” And Bugene appears like magic, silent-footed, soft-spoken, efficient.
He lives almost at the end of the carline. You walk down the road, passing great leafy willows and thick chinaberry trees, and frogs croaking in the distant swamp. Finally you came to a snug cottage, nestling behind a chinaberry tree and a high picket fence innocent of paint. There are cows here and there, back from the road, each wearing a bell. Chickens scratch among the fine white shells. The cottage steps are high, and on the screened porch a shaggy yellow-and-white dog wiggles and wags in competition with an energetic black puppy.
Inside, a radio bellows and thunders… Eugene’s pretty, half-grown daughter is costatically enjoying a baseball game. Her gyrations rival those of the pitcher. Her eyes sparkle and dance, and her small brown fists boat an excited tattoo as she listens. Major Bowes is nowhere. Amos and Andy lack everything. Fibber McGee is out of the picture. Joe DiMaggio, Carl Hubbell, Wes Ferrell, Charley Gehringer, Jimmy Foxx, Mel Ott --- they are the boys of whom Mercedes dreams and in whose hot defense she would fight an army! The living-room is comfortable and well-arranged. The rug is rolled up for summer, and lies slumbering, bent double, in front of the mantel. There is a davenport along one wall, besides numerous chairs and rockers. Pongee curtains are gathered over the glass in the triple front doors. There are other rooms farther back. Eugene is home from the Market, where he works from seven to seven --- seven days a week. He sits resting, in clean white crash slacks, after his day's work, and tells his story ……
I was born in Brookhaven, Mississippi, on February seventh, 1879. My father was Isaac Mumford and my mother was Esther Crump Mumford. I had six brothers and six sisters --- there were thirteen of us, in all. Now all there is left are five of the boys, besides me, and only one of the girls --- that's Lucille.
When I was a little boy my father was janitor of a college in Brookhaven. I remember one time, when I was very small, I and my little sister were visitin’ at my aunt's house. My uncle was a carpenter. There was an old black Granny stoppin’ with my aunt and uncle at the time. My aunt gave us a quarter and sent us down the road to a little store to buy somethin' or other for her. Right by the little store they were alterin' a buildin', and my uncle was workin' there. In front of the place was a pile of sand and buildin' material, and we got to playin' in the sand. When we started into the store, we discovered we didn't have any quarter. So we went to my uncle, who was workin’ on the repair job, and told him my aunt had told us that he would give us two bits to buy whatever we were after. He did so.
When we got home and told the truth, my aunt began to scold. This old Granny sittin’ there made my aunt stop chasin' me and my sister. She said she'd help us find the quarter ---that she could do it. But it would have to be done that night, by the light of the moon. So when the moon came up, about ten o'clock, she took us kids and went --- but she made us lead her just the way we had gone, and made us do just all the things we had done on the way there, with her watchin' us.
She led us to one place in the sand pile, made us turn about takin' double handsful of sand and put it in a little pile near the big pile. After we'd got quite a little pile dug out, handful by handful, she told us to go through the little pile. We both started scratchin' through the little pile, and right there was our quarter that we'd lost.
The first real work I did was when, I judge, I was about nine years of age. I started to work in a restaurant in New Orleans. I’d come here with the family when I was about six. I got ten dollars a month, helpin’ around the kitchen as a flunkey. I was there about three or four years, in summer --- except when I was goin’ to school, at Straight University, the first place I went to school. I got no further than the Third Grade … but I've learned a good deal out in the world.
When I was a little boy, my father was great for gardenin’. When he got his ground prepared, he'd go out in the moonlight and plant mustard-seed. Many’s the time I’ve gone out with him --- the moon high and bright --- yes, ma'am. He said the seeds wouldn't grow unless the moon shone on them when they were bein’ put in the ground.
When I got to be a boy about sixteen, I got out in the world for myself. First I went to Chicago. My first job there was a porter in a barber-shop. I used to get about three dollars a week cleanin’ the shop. I could have what I made on the side shinin’ shoes, and so on, and it was about twelve dollars a week. Then I left Chicago about the year 1901, and I went West. I went to Waterloo, lowa, and fulfilled the same position there that I did in Chicago --- the work of porter in a barber-shop. Things wasn’t so very good in Waterloo, and I didn't stay there very long.
Let's see… the next place was Omaha, Nebraska. I was still workin’ as portor. I think I stayed in Omaha about nine months. When I left there, I went to Denver, Colorado, and I was shinin’ shoes. Leavin’ Denver, I went to Pendleton, Oregon, Durin’ my time there, I was janitor in a woolen mill belongin’ to E.Y. Judd. I stayed there over a year. Then to Portland. As I had accumulated quite a little change, I didn't do anythin' there, but I only stayed about four days.
Then I went to San Francisco. Durin’ that time things were gettin' a little better, and I was stock man in the Rosenthal Shoe Company. I stayed there quite a while. I left there about a month just before the earthquake. We did have a quake one night, though, while I was there. I was asleep, and it happened just a few minutes of twelve. Even the windowpanes were crackin' and breakin', and the buildin's were swayin’. It was quite an excitement, although it didn't last over thirty seconds.
Then I pulled up from Frisco. I was alone all this time, just gettin’ 'round. I came back to Salt Lake City, Utah. The Mormons are very religious. I didn't work for a Mormon, though. Durin’ that time they were pavin' the streets, and I got a job turnin' concrete on a board with a shovel. I got two-and-a-half a day at that. I stayed there until we completed the job.
I liked California best, because I found a very intelligent class of people there. One Easter Sunday mornin' there I went to church --- it was a Catholic Church down on Grand avenue. The service was beautiful, and I'll never forget it. I never did attend church much. I went for curiosity more than anythin’ else.
Then I came back to Denver again, but I didn't stay there. When I was a waiter in a restaurant in Elco, Nevada, the proprietor used to have a good many wise ideas. He used to say, "Eugene, remember this: when a man comes in here dressed in overalls, feed his stomach. But when he comes in flashy, feed his eyes. Always judge your man." That was good advice. And it’s good herein the Market, too, sellin’ fruits and stuff. ‘Specially the ladies.
I stopped in a little town about thirty miles west of Kansas City, and worked in a stone quarry about three weeks* for two dollars a day. It was blastin' rocks with dynamite, and it sure was hard work. The summer sun was hot in the quarry. Judgin’ from the feel, it must have been above ninety all the time. Then I went to St. Louis, and went to work as a porter again in a barber-shop. I must have been about thirty then. I got about twelve dollars a week. I stayed in St. Louis about two years, as near as I can recollect.
Then I returned to New Orleans, and went to work in the American Sugar Refinery. I was truckin’ sugar. And then I got married and started a family. I just happened to see the girl, and her name was Pearl Julien. I was satisfied the minute I saw her, and I didn't want to go any farther.
We had five boys and one little girl. After I had worked and accumulated a little money, I began to be a huckster, with my own mule and wagon. We lived on South Derbigny street then, and we were happier than most folks, I guess. We had four rooms, and the little folks started to school. I made about twenty-one dollars a week. Pearl was more religious than I was, and went to the Catholic church. The children were all baptised --- Leon Alcee, Everett Eugene, Cyril Orville, Arnold Isaac, Marion Emile, and the baby, Mercedes. She's only got the one name, bein' a girl. Pearl died about 1925.
I did the best I could. I could always come home about three in the afternoon and do the cookin’, and so on. We batched it like that until about 1932, and then we moved out here with my brother and his wife. It was real home, too. About 1935 I went to work in the French Market, in one of the fruit and vegetable stalls. That was the old market, where everything was crowded and piled up like, but it was more like home. Wewas kind of all together --- sloppy and comfortable, I guess. But you could keep it clean and neat if you had a mind to. Our stall was right in the middle, and we had a lot better things than we have now. The rents were lower, and we had more stuff and we sold more, too. Now it's all new, with fresh paint, and there ain’t the romance there used to be --- that's what the customers say. To me, there never was much romance to turnips and apples and parsley. But it was the place, and the way it was run. It isn't old any more. That was the romance, I guess.
You know, the old colored people do some funny things, and they're wise, too. You can't explain it --- there ain't no explainin' it. It just is. An old colored women came to the Market the other day, and she wanted a banana stalk --- you know, the stalk the bananas grow on. She didn't want any bananas --- just the bare stalk. I asked her what in the world she wanted it for --- it seemed a funny thing to be askin' for. Well, she said she lives out in Gentilly, and she had some chickins, and one old hen had a lot of little biddies. The hen began to have lice, and the little biddies had lice, and the rest of her chickins got all covered with them. Twelve of the little biddies even died. Finally the old woman went to a seed and chickin store on Dumaine street, and got a remedy for lice. She used it faithfully, just as the seed man had said, but it didn't do any good. The chickins were still covered with lice, and so were the nests and the hen-house.
Then she talked with another old colored women that she knew, who lived in Milneburg. This old woman told her not to worry --- just to hang a banana stalk in the chickin-house, and all the lice would leave. She did; and sure enough, every louse in the place clean left. There wasn't any real reason --- they just up and left. Not a louse on any chickin, or in the nests or the whole chickin-house.
Well, I suspect maybe the stars must have had somethin' to do with it, but of course I don't know. The stars rule most everythin’ in a powerful way. Now, the old woman's hens had begun to have lice again, and here she was after a banana stalk --- and I didn't have any. But I told her to wait a while. I poked through the Italians' stalls, and brought her a whole armful that were just going to be thrown away. I thought if any old body could get rid of chick in lice that way, and had the gumption to come clear from Gentilly after ‘em, they ought to get ‘em. She went off happy, totin' the stalks. And she invited me to come and see the miracle of a banana stalk hangin' in a hen-house chasin' away lice.
I never have voted. I never did take any interest in politics, somehow. I never paid any attention to politics at all until Huey Long began to come up. And I never did go to church. I do play policy once a week, though.
One of my boys graduated from Xavier University; and the others (except Marion, who died) graduated from the Public School. The two younger ones have my ideas ------ they look into the deep things and want to be knowin’ why. But the two older ones know far too much to bother with such things. You see, I have to sort of have one set of ideas and reasons when I'm home with my family. But I have another set of thoughts when I'm thinkin' things out by myself, or talkin' with my two younger boys. You wouldn't want a sweeter mathematician than one of those boys is --- he can just figger anythin'.
Personally, I'm very well satisfied with life. Of course, if things were better, I'd be better satisfied. I got through the Depression all right. It doesn't do to complain about things --- anybody'd better just keep goin’ and make the best of it. As far as the Depression is concerned, the colored man has always had a hard time. If a man has a large salary and it's cut off, it makes a big difference. But the colored man hasn't. So he gets along about the same as usual.
I traveled around to see and hear and learn, and I did. I saw a lot of people, and heard a lot of different views. I've always been a reader --- not the light, flimsy things. I like deep subjects--- all the blood and thunder ain't worth much. I like the books of Doctor Dorsey --- The Story of Civilization and Why We Behave Like Human Beings. I've got them both. Whenever I can, I read the Reader’s Digest and Magazine Digest and Asia and Living Age, and things like that. I like Shakespeare, too, and Rider Haggard's She. That was a wonderful book, and I read it years ago, and it's still wonderful to me.
I like research work in science better than anything I know. When it comes to navigatin’ the heavens, I like that the best --- although I've never owned any kind of a telescope, nor even a good pair of opera glasses. I really believe the stars have an effect on mankind. I really believe that each and every individual here on this planet is visited by a vibration. There are different planetary influences. Sometimes the stars are in harmony, and sometimes they're not. I've been interested in the stars from my childhood --- it's always been a natural inclination with me.
I do feel that it is a positive fact that the stars do foretell things. It's just a matter of the individual bein’ able to recognize conditions. I feel that certain stars guide certain people. As for me, I think Uranus and I are pretty good friends. Certain stars influence certain people in certain seasons. I believe the stars have an influence over the whole earth. When my family is around I say that God Almighty would have a pretty hard time managin' the whole world without somethin' to help Him --- and that help is the stars, I'm certain.
Of course, when I'm talkin’ to folks that are educated good and broad, I branch out a little into other notions. For example: when the heavenly bodies keep holdin' each other in place, do you mean to tell me that there ain't some force in a planet or star that doesn't get its hooks into a man? Watch men, and you'll soon make up your mind that some force is holdin' themback or shovin’ ‘em forward. I believe that force is from the universe ------ from the stars. I believe the position of stars do foretell world events, too, if one is able to interpret them.
My grandmother used to prophesy. Everythin' she ever prophesied, about me or anybody I've known anythin' about, has always come true. She's been dead a good many years now. She made many prophecies about my life, and every one of them has come true so far. There are some that it isn't time for yet, and I can't tell them to anybody; but I know they’ll come true. It isn't time yet for them all to work out, so I’m not saying anythin’ about them.
I just don't argue with noman about what he believes. He may be right about it. Even my four boys. They've had as good schoolin' as I could give them. A good deal better than I ever got. Why, when they come to me with some big question, I just listen. It may be far too fast for me. I may have some idea about it. But I just listen. And when they get through, I say, “Boy, you're huntin’ somethin'. You may finally come home with an empty bag; but your bag's empty now, ain't it? Just keep on huntin'."
A man's always runnin' around tryin' to find somethin' to believe… somethin's that to his own advantage. Then he sets out to prove it. Just like old Buddha --- sat around and sat around, thinkin' what a raw deal mankind was gettin'. Then after some years of dopin’ it out, he came out of his hole and told it to the world. And, at that, I don't know but what he made as many safe hits as a lot of other fellows who've had their turn at bat. So there you are.
Now, you take my grandmother. She was a smart old woman. The family thought she was nuts, but she wasn't --- she was just smart. The older I got, the smarter I know she was. I never said much when I was small, and Granny and I were great friends. I remember one time, while we were still livin' in Brookhaven. I expect I was about five, at the time. My father was considered quite prosperous in those days. He wasn't, but most of the colored people around there didn't have nothin' at all much. We had a good big house, with a wide hall runnin' right through the middle, from front to back. And we had a lot of cows and pigs --- so many pigs that they'd run wild down the ravine back of the house, because there wasn't room in the lot.
Well, there was a colored band in Brookhaven, and my father played the tuba --- a big brass bass horn. It made a terrible racket, and it used to git ants on Granny. They 'specially enjoyed playin’ a piece called "Ocean Wave" --- I can whistle it yet. The tuba sure made a lot of noise in that piece, and they played it when-ever they got the chance. A colored family by the name of Jackson lived way back of us, past the ravine and up on a side-hill. One night the band was practicin’ at the Jacksons’, and my father was bustin’ away on his tuba. Granny and I was sittin’ on our front porch, in some rockin' chairs covered with sheepskins that we'd cured ourselves --- the wool still oh 'em, like they do.
Well, it was pretty dark, and the band was goin' full tilt, and then they started playin' that "Ocean Wave." It was too much for Granny, and she began to groan. "Come on, sonny," she says, "we’ll fix 'em this time!" So she takes me by the hand and we went out to the stable. It was a big stable, and I was pretty small end I held on tight. When we got out into the barnyard where the cows were, Granny reached down and picked up a piece of dry cow-manure. She closed her hand on it and crumbled it up quick, she was so mad at that "Ocean Wave." She kept sayin’ somethin', but I don't know what it was. Then she says to me, "Now you watch!" She was laughin' low like, and she was still holdin’ the manure in her hand.
We looked over at the Jacksons' house, and you never saw so many shootin' stars in all your life. They were flyin' round that house like fire-balls --- a regular rain of 'em. It kept up for quite a little while, and we could see the band men rushin’ around, scared to death. Well, Granny and me went back and sat down on the porch in our rockin’ chairs, just like we'd been. My father and the rest of the band came runnin’ down the hill and into our yard, callin’ to Granny, askin’ her if she'd seen the shootin' stars. She told me to pretend like I was sound asleep, and so did she. The band just couldn't wake us up. They kept talkin’ about those stars, and how they’d thought the house was afire, and how maybe the end of the world was comin’ and this was a sign and all. Jackson seemed to think maybe it was a sign on him. I never saw my father so excited about anythin’. Well, after a little they went on, and my father came in. There was nothin' ever said by Granny about what she did, and I never told. But it killed off the "Ocean wave." I sure used to get a kick out of that old woman.
I remember another time … Granny didn't take any stock in religion. She believed in the stars, and she could manage 'em, too. She used to make a lot of fun of christenin's. But when my brother Isaac was a baby --- he's the one we live with now --- my folks got the idea that he ought to be baptized. So it was all arranged that the christenin' was to take place at our house in the forenoon, and right after that there was to be a big dinner for the whole party. The dinin'-room wasn't big enough, so the table was run out into the back of the wide hall. Granny was busy makin' the ambrosia --- that was fixed with all sorts of fruits, oranges and pineapples and peaches and berries and cherries and I don't know what all. There was goin' to be wine and cake, too, and sweet potatoes and most everythin’. And there was goin’ to be smothered chiokin --- we had lots of chickins on the place.
Well, there was a good deal of talk before hand about the smothered chickin, this way and that way, to make it extry good, and everybody's mouth was fairly waterin’. Granny give a sort of a grin, and she said that when the occasion was such an important one, and the christenin' so grand and all, that she'd take charge of smotherin’ the chickin’.
Well, the day came and everythin' was most ready. The big table was set. The ambrosia was made. All the folks were there, minister and all, and little Isaac got christened. Granny was out in the back yard, where the wooden washtubs were. Some of the folks came hurryin' out, and told her it was time for dinner, and asked her where was the smothered chickin she had agreed to fix. She looked kind o’ pleased; and then she reached down under one of those up-dumped wooden washtubs and pulled out a big live rooster. "Why!" she said, like she was mighty surprised, "Ain't you smothered yet, you no-'count chickin? Folkses, I put him under that there tub this mornin' in plenty of time, and I figgered he'd sure be smothered good by now --- but he ain't even dead yet --- tehe! Well, you-all will Just have to wait till I git him done good, that’s all there is to it!"
And they did wait, the whole christenin’ party, till Granny killed and picked and cooked that chickin and a few more along with it. She smothered 'em, too, just as she'd promised. But she'd had her joke on 'em, and she kept sort o’ laughin’ all the time the chickin's was cookin', and every little while she'd wink at me on the sly. She knew a lot, that old woman--- a lot more then I'll ever know, and about things deeper than I'll ever get to.
Of course, so far as I'm concerned myself, there are a lot of things I don't know. I couldn't even make a wild guess about them. The other fellow can think what he pleases about religion and philosophy and science and politics. But just in my own heart, it kind of suits me to believe that everythin’ in the universe is very much the same as it has always been. It's changed some, of course, and it's always changin’. But then, we're pretty smell ourselves.
I'm comin’ to believe that there's not much in the whole universe but some kind of electricity, or magnetism or chemistry. You can call this force the cosmic ray. I like that word, "cosmic ray" --- it just suits me. Or maybe it's the electron, or the ion or the atom or themolecule. Make it little and quick. But it's there, and I believe it's always been there. What we see is the same old electricity or chemistry that's always been hoppin’ around in some form or other. But, as I said, I don't never argue with no man about anythin'. He might be right about it.
And I don't talk such things around home, either. It would shock my little daughter. Ah … there's as sweet a little dancer as you ever saw!
It's hard to sift out the most important thing in my life. I'd have to think of it --- there have been so many. But I might want to do some of the things over again, if I had the chance …Maybe life wouldn't be such a puzzle then.
LIFE HISTORY 3900 words
(Date of gathering of material) - 1 May and 17 May, 1939.
(Name of writer) - Jeanne deLavigne Scott, 532 St. Philip St., New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Name and address of person written about) - Louis Huber, 3520 Parisavenue, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Profession of person written about) - Truck gardener.
“PEOPLE PLANT TOO DAMN MUCH …”
The first time we talked with LouisHuber, was at the Farmers’ Market Section of the historic Old French Market in New Orleans. Huber is a truck gardener, and he was bringing in a load of green stuff in his Ford sedan. The rear seat had been removed, and in its place was a great mound of green leaves --- eight dozen bunches of crisp spinach, he said there were, eyeing the massruefully; besides two great sacks of snap beans. They made an emerald heap on the banquette, but Huber shook his head at them.
"Trouble is," he sighed, scratching his head, "'people plant too damn much. The prices are low--- terrible low, what we git. Look at that spinach, now--- I'll git fifteen cents for a dozen bunches, and not much for the beans. Truck gardenin' don't pay now-days. It's terrible hard work, too. But I'd rather do gardenin' than anything else. I'm used to it."
He is German, and his small figure was enveloped in blue shirt and overalls. His pleasant, tanned face was puckered into countless wrinkles, and his hands bore evidence of many years' toil in the garden rows.
At his house, on another day, Mrs. Hubor welcomed us in her quiet, almost inarticulate way. She never has learned to be a talker. Probably she has been too busy. The phrases come slowly, little by little, as shes its on the davenport in the living-room. Her brown hair is done in a knot at the back of her modest head, and her reddened fingers worry her handkerchief. Her mouth is inclined to smile, and she looks straight at you with honest, level eyes.
"My husband," she begins, clipping her words a little, in the German way, "was born the fourth of March, 1881, here in New Orleans. His father was Frank Huber, and he died in 1922. Louis’ mother was Frances Reiser, and she died in 1924. They used to have this same truck garden, and I guess that's what givemy husband the idea. They lived fifty years on three-quarters of a square, in a house that still stands there. They never owned the house, though. When they died, the ground was divided up. Louis works part of the same ground now, but he doesn't own it. He works about six lots over there, and his brother-in-law works part of it. It's the brother-in-law that owns the mules.
"You can see the garden out there across the canal. You have to get down the canal bank and cross on a wooden beam, and then climb up oh the other side to the road. But that's easier than going two or three blocks to a crossin'. They've oiled the roads, and 0 my, they're a mess!You git your feet in it and you track it all over everything. Better than the dust? Yes, of course it is.
"Louis owns six lots a ways from here --- Shirley'll take you over there after a while. She's one of the grandchildren, and she's ten. Across the canal we raise looks, mint, snap beans, merlitons, thyme, sweet corn, radishes, spinach, mustard, (that is, when the lice don't eat it), beets, carrots, egg plants, and sometimes turnips, when the bugs don't git 'em. The bugs make it tough going ---they’s always bugs.
“My husband worked with the Sewerage and Water Board until 1929. Then he was laid off, and he rented the ground across the road for a truck garden. We were married in 1906. My name was Pauline Philebar, and I was born in New Orleans on October twenty-second, 1884. First we lived on Broad street, in town, and then on Orleans street. Then we moved back here, across the road there, at the back of the garden ground, in 1916. We built this house in 1928.
"We had two boys, and they’re both married now and have children of their own. William was born on May thirtieth, 1907, and Edward was born on the eleventh of January, 1909. William and his wife and family live in the other half of this house.
It makes it nice for all of us, and so nice to have the children around. We have a parlor, a bedroom, a bathroom, and a kitchen. No dining-room --- we eat in the kitchen. But across the whole back of the house there used to be a porch. When William got married to Edna Holzer in 1928, we thought It would be so nice to have them in the other side of the house, so they moved in there. They have two --- little Bill is eight, and Shirley is ten. When they came and began to grow up, we made the back porch into a big bedroom and playroom. Come and see it --- it's all green paint, and bright and airy and a good place to play when it rains. That was the trouble before --- when it rained, everything got all wet. Now it's tight and dry, and they have good times here.
"Edward married Gladys Thiel in 1931, and they live at 123 South Clark street, in town. They have two little folks, too --- little Edward is seven and Robert is three. It's nice to have grandchildren. We're all mixed, as to nationality. My father came from Germany. There were three children in my husband's family, but one died. He has one sister still living. In my family there was nine children --- I had three brothers and five sisters.
"We've got a good big yard here. You can see the big mulberry tree … and over there is a peach tree, and a good fig tree. We have about twenty chickens, and Shirley's got two baby ducks --- a yellow one and a brown one. There's the car in the garage … he uses it for taking stuff to market. He's got an old truck, too, but half the time It's broke. It ain't no good. Yes, we've got a telephone and a radio. But we don't play the radio much. Sometimes. I don't like the jumpy, squawky music they play mostly now --- toot-toot-toot, all the time. They ain't no music to it.
"Louis went to Gentilly School when he was small. He didn't go far --- about the Fourth Grade, I guess, I don't know. But he don't know much. After you make your communion, you don't have to go to school. I went to St. Rose of Lima school, to about the Fifth Grade. When I went to school you had to pass the book three times before you got out of that grade. If the rest was slow, you had to stay behind on account of them. We had one teacher for the whole school --- not a Sister. Louis said that if he didn't know his lessons, the teacher would chase him into a tree, and he'd stay there instead of taking a lickin'. They had one teacher for the whole school, too. If a child wants to learn, he’ll learn.
“We're Catholic--- all of us has been Catholics all our lives. We go to St. Leo's Church. Yes, I make all my own clothes. That saves quite a good deal. We don't go to shows. They make your eyes hurt, anyway, and they cost money. You go to a show and you come homs, and what have you got? Nothing. We go to church --- that's our entertainment. Sometimes we go to the lake and walk around --- just walk around; not any of those picnics --- they just wear you out.
“I don't never waste anything … but we don't keep track. Sometimes I guess we make maybe four-and-a-half a week --- sometimes nothing, by the time we git through If you could sell a hundred dozen bunches of leeks at a time, and git a good price, you could save something. My!---if we had fifte on dollars a week comin' in clear! Why, any two people could live well on that much, if they didn't waste anything. The trouble is that most folks waste too much --- they throw away more than they use. And that don't pay. But they don't know no better, I guess.
"When the Depression come on, we had one of the boys still single, so that helped out some. We felt it, but of course not like some people. Some poor people never had nothing at all. Everything went down so, and we couldn't sell it. He used to bring it back home and throw it away.
"Him and I work in the garden, both of us. We do the best we can, him and I. The sun's getting hot now; but if we hire, it takes away all the profits. Colored boys don't do very well in the garden. I heard of a neighbor who went to market and sold his stuff for a dollar and a half; and by the time he'd bought feed for his horse, he went home with nothing.
“You see, you've got to have fertilizer --- that's the main thing. You can plow and water all you're a mind to, but things won’t grow good if you don't have fertilizer. And that's what costs the most. Manure is a dollar and a quarter a load, just to have it hauled. We get it from the milk-man, and you have to buy the whole pile. That costs about seven dollars, usually, and you'd have eight or ten loads. That's too much. Last year Louis hauled it himself. His brother-in-law had a mule and we got hissen. My husband hauled it in a dumpcart, and they was about fifteen loads. But he usually uses yellow meal --- cottonseed meal, that is. He uses a sack on every patch that he plows up. It has to go an every time the ground is plowed, and that's whenever a patch is empty. He plows with his brother-in-law's mules, and we manage to keep planting something all the year round.
"Families? Well, small families, big families --- you have to take what comes. They don't have big families now like they used to, though. I guess they an't afford ‘em. Now-days they have to buy everything they have; but they used to raise and make everything we had. Big families was cheaper then.
"No, ma'am, I don't smoke! I don't like to see women smoke --- I don't think it's decent. When I was young, no woman except a fast woman smoked ------ and we didn't go with that kind. Now they smoke all the time ---all the women. Me, I think it's a dirty habit for women. Louis smokes --- Just little cigarettes, and he makes 'em himself. I think that if all these women have money to buy cigarettes with, they ought not to feel that they’re in need. It's different with a man --- men always smoke, and it's all right* But it makes women look tough. I don't like it, me.
"Yes, we manage tomake both ends meet. We try to save a little something ---sometimes we do and sometimes we don't. But they's one thing we don't never do --- we don't run in debt. If we can't afford something, we just go without. It ain't so hard. It's a good deal easier than owing money and have somebody chasin' you for it.
"No, I ain't never voted. But Louis he's voted ever since he was twenty-one. He's always voted the Democratic ticket. What do we think of the Administration? Well, I don't know as we think anything about it. We don't pay any attention to politics. When the time comes, Louis votes. And between-times, we just take it the way it comes. You can't change it any, anyhow. But we sure do like Roosevelt. He's a mighty fine man. They don't git men like him very often, and I hope they keep him.
"I get so mad at my husband … He likes the gardening so well that he'd do it if he didn’t make a cent. He always says, 'Well, maybe I'll make something next time.’ He likes to raise leeks the best. They don't freeze in winter. Sometimes it gits pretty cold, and the merlitons and the snap beans they freeze. But not the leeks.
About seven blocks down the road, and over a little ways, he's got another garden on his own ground. There's a little house over back, too, with colored people living in it; and we own that. Maybe we'd better go and see the garden across the road now.” We crossed the canal, as she had said we would have to, and the oily road. There is a fence all overgrown with older berry buches and vines, and a gate. There is a long bed of sweet corn … and a bed of luxurious, spicy green mint, thirty feet long and store then six feet wide. Crisp and thick it is ...
"It's a pity," Mrs. Huber remarks, "that you can't sell mint now, when it's the nicest. It's just as tender as can be now --- the leaves is little and thin, and it's the best it is any time of the year. But you can't sell a stalk of it now. They want it around Christmas ------ and it's big and coarse then, and a lot of it's gone to seed even. You have to scratch and hunt then for nice tender stalks. But that's when they want it --- when it's hard to git. Of course, it higher then --- and that's good. But you can't sell much, for all you have. They ought to buy it new when it's so nice --- I hate to see things go so, but you can't make 'em buy if they don't 'want to. He has a few private customers --- people in their own houses. They like it, and he takes it around to them. But that takes too much time to do much of. They ought to buy it at the market, and have it; there for folks as they come along. I don't see why they don't. Ain't it nice, though? Sure, I'll out you a bunch of it."
She hurries to the shed where the knives and other garden implements are kept, bringing out a strip of latanier to wind around it. The pungent smell of the out mint assails the nostrils like dewy incense. Oh, to take the whole bed! The elder-berry bushes are in blossom. A bunch of endive, here and there, is going to seed, the stalk bright purple with blossoms. The path is grassy.
"Grass!"Mrs. Huber sniffs. “We always have to fight it out --- grass everywhere! It makes so much trouble. And there's these holes--- them's made by crawfishes. They go down so deep you never can git to the bottom of 'em. They’s white ones --- 'dead-men crawfish,’ we call 'em. They're always makin’ holes. Snakes do, too, but not so much as the crawfish. We plant radishes and mustard together, you see --- they're all little, in that bed there. First we plant the leek seed, and then when the little leeks git big enough so you can tell 'em apart, we transplant ‘em all into rows like you see. They're about ten inches high then, and before they're transplanted, each one has to be snipped off short at the top. It takes a lot of time, I tell you! You have to plant 'em, one by one --- it's hard on the back. Then you have to git in there and pick the grass out of 'em all the time, too. For the-mint, we usually git about two-bits a dozen bunches. Yes, it's good soil --- but the grass grows good in it, too.
"When the ground is wet, you can pull the leeks up, when they're ready for market But if it's dry, you have to git in with a knife and dig 'em out. That's hard work. You put five-six-seven in a bunch, according to the size. That's our brother-in-law and his son plowin' with the mules over there now. One's a real old mule, and he's a wise one. Louis pays five dollars a month for his share of this ground here.
"We've got kohlrabis, too --- a few. They're nice when they're big enough, but they don't soil very fast. We've got seven big beds of leeks here. Sometimes we raise about ten dozen merlitons in a season --- sometimes none at all. The stinkin' bugs--- them green, three-cornered kind --- eat most of 'em some years. It all depends on the bugs, a garden does. I guess they's about an acre in all here. We use city water --- that's some help. They's four faucets in this garden, and a long hose. We'd never git nothing if we had to depend just on the rains. You see, things has to grow fast or they ain't tender. Sometimes if they grow too slow, anyway, he has to plow 'em under. That helps fertilize, but it ain't makin’ anything for marketin’.
The water-grass is the worst --- it's tough, and the roots are deep and they hang on. Then there's blood-weed. The weeds grow easier than the garden plants do, seems like.
There are mulberry trees and fig trues over here, too. The unpainted picket fence is high and sound. Birds are chattering in the elderberry bushes. Then we go across the canal and down the road with Shirley. She is slender and straight, and is fond of conversation. Her red cotton dress swings in the wind, and her brown legs hurry down the path. She is full of news of the neighborhood … the priest of the colored church-school which we pass … the priest who was lazy and took no interest in the children … and the new priest who built swings and teeter-boards and a new green garage. Shrley heartily approves of this industrious man of God, as she heads toward Grandpa's other garden. She approves of camphor trees, too, and all gay flowers … especially red geraniums, which are in her own front flower-bed. "Grandpa" is away back in the garden lot, but he comes hurrying down the path between the leeks and the beets. Huber is at home here. He eyes his leeks affectionately, and pulls out a dry beet as he comes.
“I guess I forgot those few beets there," he chuckles. "I've got to plow ‘em under --- they ain't no good now. Been above the ground, and they're dry and tough. There's that chickory, too --- all gone to seed. You've got to pull it while it's young and tender --- don't git nothin' for it, though. Don't git much even when they sell it retail --- three heads for a nickel, and such. What kind of a price is that! I like the thyme and the spinach and the leeks. You can always sell spinach --- only when you have plenty, everybody else has plenty, and they won't pay nothin’. That's the trouble --- everybody's got things plenty at the same time. Now, if I was the only one that had spinach some day at the Market. I could git rid of it for a good price. But it ain’t never that way. The thyme and the mint, they're mighty nice, and they ought to sell better than they do.
"Thyme always goes to market on Thursdays --- four to six dozen bunches of it. I git ten cents a dozen bunches for it now. Sometimes it goes up. Maybe around Christmas I get maybe twenty-five, thirty-five, forty cents a dozen bunches.
"I use cottonseed meal here mostly. If you can afford manure, that lasts sometimes two or three years. It helps make real good soil. But this cottonseed meal--- we call it yellow meal --- that only lasts for three or four months, and then you have to use it again. I generally pay a dollar and a half for a sack of a hundred pounds. I hate summer --- but you got to work when you can. It gits so hot you can't hardly stand it, and the sun burns the garden stuff when it gits too hot, too.
"Sometimes I make ten dollars a week ---- but not very often. That's a good lot. Sometimes I don't make nothin' at all, what with the fertilizer and all. I wish I could make fifteen hundred a year --- I'd be settin’ pretty. What can we make, without little bit of junk here?
"But I like gardenin' --- I wouldn't do anything else if I could. I've got city water, and I've got the old truck out there, and I've got all these beds of stuff --- I like it. I like the leeks best, yes --- I've always liked 'em best. I don't know why --- I just seem more at home with 'em. They're more likely to make out than the other stuff--- you can always depend on leeks. They've got more grit. If the weather ain't very good, they keep right on growin'. And they'll sell if anything will. You see, thecooks are always makin' gumbo and such, and they have to have looks for it. Gumbo's mighty good … especially with plenty of leeks in it.
"The mint and the thyme, they're right straight along, year in and year out --- it's a matter of roots with them. Once they're planted and growin', they're set. But the rest of the stuff has its season, and then its over-with, and you have to plant another crop where it was. It's all an awful lot of work… But then, what ain't?"
THE COOK HOUSEHOLD
---
3 January 1939
( Eoll-Say)
FORM B.
STATE : Louisiana.
NAME OF WORKER : Jeanne deLavigne Scott.
ADDRESS: 532 Saint-Philip Street.
DATE: 3 January, 1939.
SUBJECT: Life History.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF INFORMANT: James Cook, (Colored), 5201 North Villere Street, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(Works at 5 French Market Place.)
THE COOK HOUSEHOLD
---
Mammy Liza sits on the gray bench on the front gallery, her arms folded across her breast. Mammy Liza has a long life-time to remember, but at this moment she is thinking of the horse-beans that are being hoed in the field across the road. The field and the horse-beans belong to James Cook, her son-in-law, and Mammy has in them an interest amounting almost to excitement. It is the time of year when horse-beans must be hoed with vigor and discrimination, and the black boy wielding the hoe is a pastmaster at deliberation. His job is to dig deep and even, so that the harvest of horse-beans will be abundant.
Mammy Liza rises and extends both black hands when we appear at the picket gate. She bustles down the clean-scrubbed steps, her countenance wreathed in the broadest of welcoming smiles. Her back is straight as a ramrod, is Mammy Liza’s, although she is eighty-four.
"Come right in, Missy, bless you," she chortles. "Clo she’ll be out in jest a minute, she will. She's expectin’ you. We talks 'bout you all day yis'day and de day before dat, ever since Cook come home and tells you is comin’ out. I’ll shut de gate --- don't you mind ‘bout it. Git back from de fence, puppy --- stop your makin’ sech a uprisin’. He don’t know no better, him."
Clotille comes hurrying around the corner of the gallery, her kinky hair straightened and worn in a long, neat net. A small black girl trails in her immediate wake. The child belongs to the tenants who live in the ell of the house. She is all eyes and pigtails, and her thin legs fairly twinkle after Clotille. She carries a large basin in one hand, balanced perilously. Clotille rescues the basin and sends the picaninny back to her chores.
We are on the gallery, with its wistaria vine twining thickly around the posts and up over the roof. The house itself is painted with worn yellow ochre and green trimmings. Three rooms in the main portion, and two in the rented all. We are ushered into the middle room --- "mamma's room," Clotille calls it. There are flowered curtains hung across the small panes of glass in the upper part of the double doors. It is beginning to rain, and the fire in the grate looks cheerful and alive. Clotille steps to the window and flings open one of the green blinds. The pink curtains billow in the breeze, a pathway of light slants across the clean linoleum rug. Clotille hastens to replenish the fire with sticks of wood.
"Wood's brighter," she says. "It takes the damp off better. This year the wood's all wet --- we has to dry it out good before it'll catch fire, 'specially in the stove. Never saw such wood, me."
On the bed is a creamy cover. Mammy Liza made it all by hand, of Durham tobacco sacks.
"She rips them all flat," Clotille explains, "and then she press them, and then she sew them with stitches small and little. She sews fine, mamma does. I don't know how many hunderd of them little bags it took to make that spread, but they was plenty. She got folks to save them for her, and she made two spreads. This one's got a blue border, and all them little colored decorations. But the other one's all white, with a yellow border all around it. Yellow wears good, and it don't fade. Mamma's always piecing. I'll show you a quilt she pieced for me, and they's one on the bed, under the spread."
She folds back the creamy spread, and there is a quilt of tiny pink and white and blue pieces --- squares and triangles and fine, short stitches. Soft and light and freshly clean. The pillows are covered by the long spread, and several cushions of prints and silk are piled on the foot of the bed. The warm firelight plays over the soft green walls of the quiet room, and flickers up on the green wooden ceiling. A rug is spread in front of the grate, and a tall mirror in a gilt frame is hung over the mantel. We rock comfortably, and watch the shifting light making rainbows in a glass ink-stand on the mantel-shelf, and the intricacies of a mystifying pin-cushion, which defies description in more ways than one. Only one thing is certain about that pin-cushion --- it is too much respected ever to stick pins into. It is stuffed in layers and portions, with red and yellow in each section. In some ways it is like a mammoth orange that is falling deliciously apart; or maybe it is more like a cluster of bewitched bananas. Clotille has had it for years.
"And that sheaf of field rice on the wall," she adds, "has been hanging there since 1916, sure enough. The one hanging in the kitchen has been there since 1907. The grains is all good yet, too. 'Course, some has shook off, what with dusting them every once in a while, and shaking them out, and so on. But they keeps good."
A child’s chair stands near the head of the bed --- reminiscent of the days when little ones were about. A phonograph occupies one corner, with a big china lamp resting on top of it. In another corner is an armoire with mirrored doors. In this the precious quilts are stored, along with a beautiful white crocheted spread which "an Italian lady" made and gave to Clotille thirty years ago. The starched white scarf which drapes the mantel sways sociably as the fire flares. We lean back in our rocker, and Mammy Liza sits straight and respectful in hers. The tiny tight braids of hair lie close to her head, neat and short and careful. The small gold earrings in her ears catch the light. Her old eyes are bright and quick.
"Dey thinks I can't see, at my age," she sniffs. "But I kin. I kin see more’n most. 'Course, some ways I don’t see so well. But I kin thread a needle, and dat’smore'n a lot of dem kin do. And I kin sew easy. I likes to sew, only I has used up all de pieces I could find. Sewin' takes lots of pieces, seems like, ‘specially quilts. And I kin use de smallest pieces you ever see ---jest a line, some of dem is."
She lays another stick of wood on the fire, and settles herself for real confidences.
"No. I ain't scarcely got a gray hair, but I has been through a lot of years, me. <text not clear> Eliza Perry now, but my mother was Harriet Jones, and my father was Gilbert Jones.
I was born at Belle Chasse Plantation. I borned Clotille there, and my mother borned me there, and she was borned there, too. When I was sixteen, I got married to Emile Benama --- it really were Bien-aime, and it means ‘sweetheart,' only us colored folks don't know how to spell good. When it comes to writin’ down names, de white folks spells us how we sounds when we say it. Emile, his name was Bien-aimé, but dey spells it Benina on de paper. Clotille she always spell it Be name, but I guess she don't know it perfect neither. It ain't of no account, as I knows of, though, how dey spells it --- it was my name, jest de same, and de way dey says it all sounds alike.
"Yes ma'am, I was married in de Baptist church at Belle Chasse --- right in de church, and Reverend Robert King he done married us. After dat I had four misses, and three born and growin' childern --- dat's seven. De last I had was twins. My mother she had twins twice, yes ma'am. My oldest son was Joe, and he was named after my mother's father. He died, though, about nine months ago. He were my first child, and I called him Buddy.
"You know, in de old times we didn't get marryin' licenses like dey does now. You had to go to de boss-man, and he got de piece of paper with de writin' on it, and dat was de license to git married by. I didn’t keep de first marriage license I had --- I was young and foolish, and I lost it. But it was recorded at Point a la Hache. I'm confidence --- yes, I'm confidence it been thirty-nine years ago. I got my last one, though. Wait --- it's here, put away in a old envelope."
Mammy Liza rummages, a little flustered and hurried. In triumph she produces the precious paper --- a marriage certificate, proving her lawful union with Richard Perry.
"Yes ma'am," she continues, folding the paper carefully and sliding it back into its envelope, "I were married to Reverend Richard Perry in 1911. He were a Baptist minister. I got my license in Gretna dat time, on de other side of de river. I was married in my house ar Fairfield Plantation, a little piece up de river, where I was cookin’ for some white folks. We was married by Reverend Sandy O’Given. After a while I continued on to Waggaman's Plantation, and set right down and eat and drink. I didn't stay there too long. The Reverend he took sick in two years and died jest before dat September storm.
"Den I come on dis side of de river, and cooked for de old white folks what I cooked for before. I lived with Clotille backwards and forwards for about three years, and cooked for white folks off and on. I come back here in 1931."
"You come back in 1927, mamma," Clotille corrects gently.
"Well, I been here ever since, anyhow. I likes to wash dishes --- I always did like to wash dem dishes. Oh, I kin iron good, too. I used to turn out twenty-four shirts at a time --- and dem was shirts! We used to have dem 'coffin-bosom’ shirts to iron, and tucked bosoms. You took dem long, like dis, and stretch each tuck smooth and firm, and den you irons it quick and light, and every tuck jest like dat, from de middle to de sides. We had shirts without cuffs, too, and dey was all particular and fine.
"No, I ain't never voted. I don't know nothin' about dem things. I leaves dat to de mens. I knows my house and my cookin', and dat's enough. Clotille she goes out washin' and ironin' three days every week. I wisht I could git me some work right now --- I'm strong and willin'. But don't nobody want you to work when you gits up in your eighties. I tells dem I is only seventy or so, but it don't do no good. I Kin doa lot of work round dis house, though, and it he'ps Clotille so's she kin git out to work.
"De Reverend he died in 1914. He was a soldier with de Confederate Army, in de War Between de States. He built a Baptist church at Harahan, him. He said he'd build it if he died doin’ it --- it were his work for de Master. And he did die about a year after de church was built. De white folks give him de ground. He was a pow'ful good man, de Reverend was."
Clotille comes from the side gallery, and the breeze frets the white scarf on the dresser.
"Latch de door, Clo," Mammy warns. "Latch it tight, so de wind don't come in. It's goin’ to rain when de wind blow like dat. De wood's dryin’ out now, so’s it burns good."
Clotille takes us on a tour of inspection, quietly proud of all she and Cook have accomplished by patience and thrift. Cook inherited the property from his father --- that is, he and a brother inherited it jointly. After some years, Cook bought his brother's interest. There is quite a stretch of ground. At the front and around one side of the house is a border of thirteen rose-bushes --- tall, sturdy shrubs, some with buds.
"I has lots of roses," Clotille assures us. "I has White Beauty, light pink and dark pink, and I have a red one."
We recall the beautiful bouquets which Clotille has brought us, year after year. Sometimes there have been velvety crimson coxcombs included, or a spray of sweet geranium. Once she improved on nature, drenching the coxcomb with violent perfume. There are geraniums here now, beside the brick path. Bed and pink, Clotille says. Not a weed, nor a spear of grass where it shouldn’t be. The broad-picket fence protects the little yard.
"This here's the cry-baby tree," Clotille chuckles, pointing to a leafless tree close to the fence. "It's nice in summer, when the leaves is on. It has a lot of long red pods, and the childern takes them and sticks one end in their mouth, and blows hard. The pods they squeal like little babies cryin'. That's why they calls it a cry-baby tree." She laughs like a delighted child. "I hope that boy works the ground over there good for the horse-beans. They is up nice, a whole acre of them, and they need good tendin’ to.”
Six buckets of ferns are arranged along the edge of the gallery. One of them Clotille caresses with a tender black hand.
"This one was my brother Joseph's," she sighs. The brother was very dear. "He's dead now. I love it because it belonged to him. When he died, he give it to me. I he’ped take care of him in his last sickness. In the summer, this gallery is like a woods, all green and shady with wisteria. The china-berry tree over there is big and cool ---this house ain't never hot, like some is. It's always a good place to come home to."
The house stands on a corner, away beyond the Industrial Canal. We recall Cook's careful instructions about finding it, if we came by streetcar. "You git off at the bus station," he explained, "and you walk towards the woods to the next corner, and then you walk back. Maybe I kin tell it better this way; Yougit off the car, and you walk two blocks down from the bus station, and then you walk three blocks back to Villere." That is why we took a taxi.
Cook and clotille own the two small houses next to the one in which they live. They are neat little houses, and their colored tenants help to make a small settlement. One with two rooms and a kitchen is rented for four dollars monthly; the next one, "the little house," as Clotille affectionately calls it, has two rooms and rents for two-dollars-and-a-half. The two rooms in the ell rent for two dollars.
"Taxes cost so much," she reflects. "But it's pretty out here in the summer. Across the street over there is a big patch of wild blackberries. The vines is big and green all through winter, like you see. Oh, them berries is beautiful --- and anybody what wants to can go and pick them. Some of them grow in the shade of the china-berry tree --- it makes a cool place to rest when you're all hot from pickin’. They is beautiful berries, yes ma'am."
There are many small houses of the colored folk clustered around Cook's property. Clotille points out the tall orange tree at the corner of the second house --- she and Cook planted it. She glows with contented and pardonable pride at all they have done, and they have done a great deal.
"When we first come here," she goes on, "you could see clear to the woods both ways on Lizardi street, and to the Sugar Refinery the other way. Now it's built up, and you can't see anywhere near that far."
A clear-eyed, straight-limbed mulatto girl comes along the path. Clotille hails her joyously.
"It's Alberta, my niece," she explains, presenting the new-comer. "She's Cook's sister's daughter. Her mother's been dead five years now. But Cook and me took her when she was two-and-a-half years old, and we brought her up. Yes ma'am, we baptized her and all, and she lived with us till last October. She got married to Isaac Harrell five years ago. She's got two childern, and they was both born in our house. Vernon's the oldest --- he'll be three on January 20th of this year. The baby's a girl --- Shirley Mae, and she's seventeen months old. They live jest up the street a piece. Alberta's twenty-three --- my, how time goes!"
At the other side of the house is a more spacious yard, well fenced, with a china-berry tree in one corner. In a far rear corner is a large shed of corrugated iron. Within it is a black sedan. Cook later informs us that it is a Chevrolet of 1929 vintage.
"The license costs so much,” Clotille observes, running her fingers along the fender. "Last February, when our license run out, we jest put the car up and used the license money for things we needed more. This February I guess we'll get another license. We used to keep the mule in here, before we got the car."
The white dog dances and skirmishes in ecstasy. The Rhode Island Red rooster and his two wives eye us warily. Presently the rooster marches to an upturned coop, mounts it resolutely, and crews with vigor and determination.
"Nobody can’t come round here at night," Clotille laughs, "he makes so much fuss. He always crows when he gits excited. He's smart, him. We don't have to open no gate for him to git in to bed --- he jumps the fence into the chicken-yard and gits into the chicken-house by his own self, and stands there peekin’ out the window. Then he quiets down and goes to bed sensible. It's a funny thing --- a dog and a rooster always knows when they's any stranger around. He's a last year's rooster, and he takes spells of standing with one foot on top of the other, like he is now. I ain't never seen no rooster do that, 'ceptin’ him, Jimmy's a last year's puppy. Sometimes at night he push the gate open and come right in the yard --- and everybody come he'd meddle them."
In the small, fenced-off chicken-yard are nine chickens and six white ducks. The ducks swim luxuriously in a large washtub sunk in the ground. The water is clean and fresh. Over the chicken-yard spread the branches of a pear tree. We have eaten preserved pears from that tree.
"It bears two hampers of fruit some years," Clotille points out. "They is good pears, too. Jimmy, don't you go jump up on no dress, you bad one!"
We return by way of the gallery and the energetic picaninny, envisioning the abundant summer shade of the wistaria vine that "has been cut down twice since last year" for the purpose of moral rectitude and physical convenience. We are shown the front room, which is the bedroom belonging to Cook and Clotille. The bed is wide and smooth, covered tastefully with a lustrous rayon spread of delicate lavender. From the chifforobe in one corner the pictured faces of two colored men in uniform keep vigil. Clotille reaches for one, and holds it in loving fingers.
"These are Cook's two soldier brothers, Henderson and Joseph," she says, smiling into the eyes of the photograph she holds. "This one, Henderson, is the baby brother. I don't really know how old he is now, but I finished raisin’ him. They was both in the last war, so I guess they must be thirty years old by this time." The War ended more than twenty years ago … But the "baby brother" lives in Chicago, and to Clotille he never could change. She sits down on the davenport at the other side of the room, the picture still in her hands. But this is today. The five puffy cushions must be plumped and freshly piled on the davenport. So the photograph is fondly set back in its place of honor on the chifforobe. We peer out of the door leading to the front gallery. Dusk is falling, and a fine rain with it. The gray wooden bench stands in front of the door, waiting for the night. On the side gallery hangs a cluster of empty bird cages --- mute reminders of the canary families which Clotille has raised in other seasons.
Presently we go back through Mammy Liza's room, and on to the comfortable kitchen. Everywhere in this simple house there is the atmosphere of home. The kitchen floor is covered with linoleum, neat and shiny. Everything shines --- the glassware on the buffet in one corner, the window-panes, the tall-legged cook-stove, the dishes in the corner "safe," the utensils on the table by the window. At the back of the room stands a round dining-table, covered with pale-blue oilcloth and a spotless white cloth over that. An old-fashioned sewing-machine with a box top occupies a far corner, and at one side is a high green refrigerator. Back of the brilliantly polished stove is a fire-place, unused now. On the mantel-shelf stands a row of glass jars --- coffee, file, and pumpkin seeds. The last, Clotille informs us, "is good for gravel."At one end of the shelf stand two glistening glass lamps --- there is no electricitynor gas here, although there is water. On the buffet is the picture of a church with a clock-tower. We hear a steady tick-tick-tick --- the church-tower contains a real clock.
Under the kitchen table are stored turnips with crisp greens, luscious cabbages --- "like we always have at New Year's, for good luck," Clotille hastens to explain. The wife of the Baptist minister is making a call. She is a soft-spoken, rather retiring colored woman, with good manners and a becoming dignity. She and Mammy Liza are discussing the merits of teeth.
"I kin chew on my gums better than I kin with teeth," Mammy insists, warming her capable old hands over the stove. "I kin chew anything, outside of a bone. 'Course, bones takes teeth.”
At this point, Cook arrives. With him is Dennis Laurence, a nephew, and his wife Hattie. Dennis is a tall young mulatto with a smooth, bright skin. His mother was Cook's sister. Dicey Cook Laurence, now dead. A great sack of vegetables is deposited near the fireplace. Through the red netting we see a grapefruit and yams and carrots and another big green cabbage. Cook works in the Old French Market, at the wholesale end. Clotille expounds on the doings of certain white folks:
"Last night I went to take care of two childern of a white lady that lives a piece up the street. She and her husband never did git home till fifteen minutes past five this mornin', and I never had a wink of sleep. When she come in, she says, 'Why, Cooky, you ought to have laid down --- they is three beds here. Why didn't you lay down?’ But she didn't tell me they was any three beds there when she went away. I wouldn't be like to lay down on her beds without permission, I should think. And him --- he was so drunk he couldn't hardly git from the car into the house, but he'd been driving right through the dark anyhow. Some white folks is right tough!" Clotille fairly snorts disapproval and disdain, her black face puckered in disgust at such goings-on. There are no such disgraceful performances in this well-ordered negro household.
"I made a fruit pudding for New Year's," she announces, a pleased smile lighting her round face. "It's got everything good in it."
She is busy heaping a dish with the confection --- fluffy as feathers, filled with all manner of richness, and of a most delectable flavor. Clotille tells us how to make it, step by step.
"First you beat up six eggs in a big bowl, all except one of the whites," she directs. "You beat them good and light, and then you add two cups of sugar, and beat it some more. Then you add a pound of seedless raisins, half a pound of sliced citron, half a pound of sliced dates, a pound of pecan meats broken up small, and five sour apples pared and cored and cut into little diamond pieces. Then you put in two teaspoons of vanilla, and beat it all good. Now you take five slices of white bread and dip it in cold water and squeeze it out dry with your hand, and crumble it all up small. You add this to the pudding, along with two cans of Pet cream. Then right in the same pan you drop two tablespoons of butter, all cut up into little tiny pieces. The same pan you make the pudding in, you bake it in. It takes two hours baking, in a moderate oven.
"Now you take the white of the egg that was saved out, and beat it good and stiff and spread it over the top of the pudding. Brown that in the oven nice and slow, about fifteen minutes. Then you let the pudding get cold, and you pour a whisky-glass of old whisky over it. It ought to be kept a good week before it's eaten. When you go to serve it, make a sauce for it like this: Boil one cup of sugar and one cup of water to a good syrup, and let it get cold. Then you beat in two tablespoons of soft butter, jest like it is, and add half a cup of good whisky. You beat it all up till it's blended, and then you serve it over the pudding. It's sure rich and smooth." It is. It would revive a mummy. One would even be grateful to have been a mummy, for the sake of such a reviving.
The minister's wife has gone on her way. Mammy Lisa is busy discoursing with Hattie upon the excellence of Cook's spiritual condition.
"Cook he prays every night," she nods with satisfaction. "He gits down on his knees and tells de Lawd everything. And den he gits to cryin', and de tears runs right down his face."
"Oh my," Hattie rejoins in awed tones. "Every night?"
"Well, no, not 'zackly every night, but most nights like. Some nights. Real often, anyhow, De cryin’ does him a pow'ful lot of good. Cleans his soul, de tears does. Yes ma'am. Cook takes his religion deep. Well, de Lawd He knows His own childern, and Cook he realizes dat."
Clotille pokes the fire, and talks as she works. She was, as Mammy Liza has said, born on the Belle Chasse Plantation, That was on October 18th, 1877. Her father's father was Didier Bienaime --- a slave owned by Carlo Razou, on the Rezou Plantation in Plaquemine parish. Didier’s wife was Louise, and she was a slave also.
"I've had four babies --- two girls and two boys," Clotille ruminates, ad-justing the damper. "First I had twins, a girl and a boy, in 1904, but they died right away, so I never got to name them. They'd be more than thirty-four years old now --- think of it! In 1906 I had a little boy, and he was born dead, but I named him James, just the same. Then in 1907 I had a little girl, and she died right away, so I didn't give her a name. But I wasn't married then. Cook and me was married in 1909, here in New Orleans. We hadn't had no luck with our babies, and we never did have no more. First I lived on Saint Ann street, and then on Saint Peter street, and then on Burgundy. When we got married we went to live on Toledano street, and in 1914; we moved to Cadiz street. Then in 1920 we come here.
"I used to work in the field, when I lived on the plantation. I cut cane and pulled a hoe. I like the field work --- 'tain't hard if you know how. I like to cut cane best --- but it's hard to pull dat hoe --- um-um! worked in the field for about three years. Of course, I was young and fresh then. After I come to New Orleans, I worked out --- cooking and washing and ironing. I'd rather wash and iron than do anything else. I don't know why --- I jest like it. I guess maybe it's because the clothes look and smell so nice and clean."
Later, with the fire blazing high in Mammy Liza's grate, Cook tells us that he was born on the Walker Plantation, in Saint Bernard parish, on July fourth, 1876.
There were eleven children in the family --- fire boys and six girls. One of the boys and two of the girls died, but all the rest are living. His father was Carl Cook, and his mother was Rose Henderson Cook. Her mother was Annie Henderson, and her father was John Henderson, both slaves. On the other side, his grandmother was Dioey Cook, and his grandfather was James Cook, for whom he was named. Cook recalls tales of James and Dicey having been brought to Louisiana on slave ships, but the details have grown vague and cloudy.
"Dey used to tell a lot of things," he reminisces, his big black hands folded on his knees. "And I guess plenty happened in dem days. Me, I stayed in Saint Bernard parish till I was round twenty-five or thirty. Then I come to the city, and stayed in the city. When I was quite a lad I left the Walker Plantation and went to live with my grandmother Annie Henderson, on Flater’s Plantation. My Grandmother Henderson she raised me till I got to be ten-twelve years old. Then I left there and come to stay with my mother and father. We was still in Saint Bernard parish, in the village of Fazende-ville." The big, deep voice booms musically in the half-lit room, and Clotille brings in a lighted lamp and sets it on the dresser.
"I went to school in Fazendeville, through the Fourth Grade," Cook continues. "In dem days you jest had to know your lessons till you got through. It didn't go a grade a year, or nothin’ like that. You learned, and you didn't git into no higher grade till you had learned. Now they don't seem to learn nothin' much in school --- not even how to count straight, seems like."
"I didn't go to school much," Clotille observes, standing in the doorway."All I went to was the colored Methodist Church school on LaHarpe street. But I didn't never learn to read or write." She peruses an almanac as she talks, turning the leaves from back to front. "I don't know what year this almanac is," she mutters to herself, "But I guess it's 1937. No, ‘tain't --- it's 1938. I had a new one somewheres." The almanac, by the way, is upside down.
"Well," Cook resumes, "I started to work from the time I was able to work. When I was little, I used to work in between-times from school. First I was in a dairy.
I milked the cows and delivered the milk, and I got four dollars and a half a week. I drove a double team of hosses for the Cloverland Dairy, in Saint Bernard parish. It was a good dairy, and it was owned by Miss Lily Bemiss. We always called her Miss Lily. I must have stayed round there workin' for dem three or four years, till I thought the money was too young for me. I wanted more money, so I went to work for gardeners up and down the parish roads. But I didn't like gardening very much at all. They was cold and frost and stuff. We used to do different than they does now. Then we used to cut de cabbages early every mornin’ when the dew was on it. Sometimes frost and ice. Then we sold it at the French Market that mornin’. Sometimes we had two loads, one for mornin’ and one for evenin'.
"After I left the gardeni’ I went to work for the Chalmette Company. It was way down by the tracks, a good deal farther down than the Refinery is now. They used to have cotton and stuff come in. They had two grain mills, and a grain shoot to shoot the grain clean out to the river at Chalmette. After I left that I went on the river workin’ truckin’ cotton to the ships from the wharf. They was a different gang from me that unloaded it. Then I went to workin’ down in the ship's hold. All up and down the river, loading cotton and different cargo. But I was the cotton man. Sometimes there was grain or lumber in the bottom, then the cotton was loaded on top of the grain or lumber. I worked all the way from Chalmette to Westwego. At times, in certain parts of the boat, they'd put big 'hogs* of tobacco, and then cotton on top of that. I worked at that about seven or eight years.
"Then I come on in to the French Market and worked for Joe Mustache for six or seven years. He had wholesale fruits and vegetables, and all sorts of produce. Game too. Then I went to work for myself at the Mehle Market, on Howard street, between Sixth and Seventh streets. I had that --- let me see ---“
"Three years and three months," Clotille supplements crisply.
"That's it. Then I went to a private market on Franklin, between Cadiz and Valence. I was there --- let me see --- "
"Three years and five months," Clotille prompts.
"Then I had me a wagon and peddled fruits and vegetables. I had been peddling all the time I was in the markets, too. Then I went with Sam Petrie, about 1931, in the French Market, where I am now.
"Don't know how it is --- Clotille and me don't seem to have no luck with our children. Dey all died right away. We've had four, and lost every one of them. But dey's always some child comin’ along for us to raise, seems like. We's always raisin’ them for somebody.”
"Well," Clotille sighs, "we always done our best. Once we raised a little baby six months old. That was Emile, my nephew, and he was named after my father. We kept him till he was five-and-a-half, and then his mother got jealous because he loved me better than he did her. It was hard, losin' him --- he'd cling to me and call me 'Mamma Cook,' and pretend he didn't know his real mother at all. Well, I had all the work of him and none of the good of him --- the work was all over when his mother got him. That's the way it goes.
"We raised two twins, too --- they was Mitchell and Joseph, and no relation to us. They was six years old when they came here to us. Then we took Dicey Cook's niece when she was a year and a half old. She stayed with us till she was about thirty, and then she got married. Me and my husband and my mother we raised her.
"I had a little adopted brother, what mamma had took. His name was Joseph, too, and we had him from a baby. We brought him up till he got married. Then we took Mercedes Bennett --- mamma's great-granddaughter. We took her with us when she wasn't quite three, and raised her till she was thirteen.
"We raised Alberta and her two sisters --- they is Cook's sister's children. And now we're helping Alberta to raise her two babies."
Cook and clotille are members of Liberty Baptist Church, on Desire street, where the Reverend Noah Copelin is shepherd of the colored flock. Heis affectionately known as "Reverend Norah." Cook's eyes glow with an earnest faith when he discusses this phase of his life.
"I'd rather go to church than anything else I know, outside of workin'," he rumbles placidly. "I got religion through believin'. I can't 'splain jest how it come about --- I jest received religion. I knowed the only way I could git religion was to repent. The Bible tells us we must believe, repent and be baptized, and thus sinners shall be saved through true belief. I hadn't never been baptised before."
"Clotille was baptised when she was ten years old," Mammy Liza puts in. "That was at Belle Chasse Plantation. She was baptized there in the river, by Reverend Bob King. About twelve was baptized at the same time. Clotille was so small when she was baptised, they had to hold her up in the water."
"I was baptized in the pool inside Liberty Baptist Church, on Easter Sunday, 1937," Cook resumes. "I knew I had to, jest from readin’ the Bible and knowin' I had a soul to save. I been readin’ the Bible off and on all my life, ever since I been big enough to read. I used to go to Sunday School and everything. But the part I enjoys most is the Communion Service --- the Lord's Supper, which we has on the fourth Sunday in every month.
"The Lord's Supper is held at night, so everybody can be sure to go. The congregation don't have much to say till jest before Communion, and then each one tells of his determination for the next month. Then they lives up to it the best they kin. Each one prays for the other to hold out, 'cause if you let down they ain't nothin' to you. They all gits up and tells what the way is they's traveled, and how the Lord has stood by them, and how they's goin' try to hold out and be truthful to their church.
'You pray for me in your prayers, and I'll pray for you' --- like that.
"After Iconfessed to be baptized, then I had to be in fellowship before I'd be a member. After you is fellowshiped, you become a full member of the church. The minister reads certain portions of the Bible in church, to a number who have been baptized, right after the baptism. They are fellowshiped, and then they take Communion --- everything on the same night. Me, I'm a deacon."
"I'm an usher and a steward in our church," Clotille says. "A steward is next to the pastor. The stewards get the wine ready for the Communion --- our wine is real grape-juice. We keep everything proper and in order for the services."
"We got an Auxiliary of six or seven deacons that really work," Cook continues.
"Oh Cook, you got more than six or seven, ain't you?" Clotille objects.
"I said what really work," Cook persists solemnly. "We ain’t got no lady Workers on our Auxiliary. Jest men. The ladies got their own Auxiliary. They is the lady stewards, and they’s twelve of them."
"We have fish fries and church suppers at the homes of our members, to raise money for the church," Clotille remembers to add.
"They's prayer meeting Sunday mornings and Tuesday nights," Cook goes on. "Then we have revival meetings."
"In the spring," Mammy nods.
"Yes, in the spring. Sometimes we have visiting preachers. Our church is seventy years old, and it got condemned. So we built a little part at the back, where we could be safe in holding services without the roof fallin' in on us or something. Now we're building a new church at the front."
"Yes," Clotille relates, "first we got a carpenter. He’d do a little and then he'd put it off, and then he'd wait a while, and he never did seem to git along with it. Cook kept tellin’ the members,‘We kin build the church our own selves.
We kin work on it every Saturday evenin’ and Sunday evenin', and we'll git it done.’ So they started in with that, and the church is gittin’ built. They ain't carpenters, but anybody can drive a nail and set the timbers straight, if they wants to. They builds the church, and us women-folks feeds them."
"We all contribute what we kin, as we kin spare it," Cook adds. "This year the deacons taxed themselves two dollars apiece towards the buildin’."
He leans back comfortably in his chair, the firelight in his eyes. It has been a long day at the Market, and his supper in the cheerful kitchen was large and substantial. Mammy Liza rocks her body gently in her straight-back chair.
"I done told you more things today dan I ever told anybody," she murmurs, a trifle amazed at herself.
Clotille relaxes and folds her hands. It is the end of the day. The yellow fire crackles and snaps. We recall other years, when Cook was a decade younger … He peddled fruits and vegetables and coal along our street, wearing an immaculate white coat in summer, padded to the eyes in winter. He drove a huge mule --- sometimes a gray one, sometimes a brown one. This animal always was referred to as his "beast." Never a day that he did not speak of Clotille, with pride and deep affection. Then sometimes it was religion.
"Well," he would nod amiably, "religion's a good thing, I guess. But it do seem sometimes that the more religion some folks has, the harder to git along with they is. I declare, I never see the beat of some of them round where we lives. And somebody done stab my beast --- dat mule it done up and died, and I had to borry me dis here one from Clotille's folks to git my stuff peddled today. I guess that's why I didn't brang the punkin I promised to git you. I was all upset over losin' that beast. I picked out the punkin, all right --- and then I jest up and drivved off without it!"
Tonight we inquire about Cook's politics. His heart is mellow with thoughts of his Lord, but his spine snaps straight when we ask how he votes.
"Me?" he booms, "Why, I'm a Democrat --- yes ma'am --- ain't no two ways about dat!"
Clotille and Mammy Liza smile approvingly. They are colored women of the old school, and neither of them ever has voted. Cook, towering six-feet-one and weighing near three hundred, does the voting for his family.
Simple, natural and honest, always ready to work wherever there is work to be done, and always finding it --- kindly and sincere and straight-living. A childless home --- in which at least nine little ones have been fed and clothed and loved. We could do with more households like Cook's.