Approximately 3,000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: FLOWING ON
Date of First Writing	March 15, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	James Grigsby
Fictitious Name	Jake Philpot
Street Address	2019 Bull Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Collector
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Hama of Reviser	State Office
It was Monday morning, December 12, 1932, and the snow was silently falling on the streets of Columbia, South Carolina. As clang and swish of trolley cars went on as usual- There, too, was the roar of truck and auto traffics. Men, women, and children walked. In fact, there was an unusual amount of walking. Many walked because they could not ride; they were jobless.
At the office of the big Congaree furniture store on Main Street, it was, indeed, blue Monday. The reception extended the job seeker there was as bleak as the day. Figuratively speaking, the manager needed help: some one with ability to keep the big electric sign, Just above the entrance to the building, flashing the name, C-O-N-G-A-R-E-E.
Manager Bason of the Congaree was in a blue and ugly mood that morning. He had cut to the bone the store's overhead expense. The services of a number of collectors and one or more office workers had been discontinued. Salaries had been cut, and he had even begun to practice economy with the heating and lighting in the big three-story building. Just a small light here and there shined down upon the modem and expensive suites of furniture - fine merchandise - that the home owners would not or could not buy, even at bargain prices.
"Bam, bam, bam! " Manager Bason's big fist pounded on the desk before him, as he talked intently to the three collectors Who stood nearby thumbing through stacks of bills. "We've got over $100,000 worth of merchandise out on accounts among the people of Columbia, and yet our income is insufficient to meet our obligations. Unless you three men can collect $20,000 and place it on this desk by January 1, you'll be no jobless as rabbits after a big snow storm. I tell you that because January 1, 1933, is the very Inst day the Congaree's creditors have agreed to wait for their money." The excited manager then turned to Jake Philpot, pointed a finger toward the street and said! "Philpot, go out there and squint until that amount comes into this store."
When Jake Philpot reached the sidewalk with his bulging billfold, he felt the chill of wet snow flakes on his face. He paused just long enough to view the traffic on the street. "Tramp, tramp, tramp," came the noise of shoo heels pounding the wet sloppy sidewalks. He knew only too wall that many of those walkers were hunting for jobs. But Jake Philpot had a real job, and he had to be on his way.
He opened the door of his battered oar parked against the curb, tossed his billfold on the seat, climbed in, started the motor, and was off. He drove on and on through the falling snow, until he reached the big Pacific Mill village on the outskirts of the city. He stopped his motor on Whaley Street, the main thoroughfare in the mill village. There, again, he found men and woman walking, and with worried looks on their faces. The only noise around that long fiveatory building was the maddening "tramp, tramp" of shuffling feet. The mill had suspended it a operation indefinitely.
Jake Philpot began to walk. On and on he walked; he knew not where. "I have a job, yet I haven't anything to do but walk." he thought aloud to himself. He walked, too, until he heard a voice singing. He paused in his tracks, leaned his head to one aide, squinted his right eye, and listened to one singing the old familiar hymn: "He Will Carry You Through."
"Will carry you through!" Jake Philpot repeated, as he resumed his walk in the direction from whence came the sound of that voice. Be found the soloist to be that of a mill worker who lived in an humble cottage located on one of the back streets of the village. Be knocked on the door. It was immediately opened, and there stood a mother with a crying - maybe hungry - child in her arms.
"Good morning, Mr. Philpot," she said. Then, pointing to a comfortable chair, the added! "Won't you have that chair? I'm sorry we haven't any more to offer you. The mill is not running and, consequently, we have no way of making a payment on the furniture. You can take it back if you need it."
"Thanks, but I can't tarry longer than to tell you that you need not worry about your debt to the Congaree Furniture Company. The hymn that you have just sung has taken care of that. But tell me, Mrs. Roe, if you can, where I might go and find people who do not have to walk."
Mrs. Roe thought for a moment, and then, pointing in an easterly direction, said! "Over there, during ay sleepless nights, I can see the bright lights shining; and they ride."
"The bright lights, and they ride!" Jake philpot repeated over and over again, He understood. He straightened his blinking eyelids, set his head squarely on his shoulders, and made a dash for his old battered car. With a pop and a sputter, the old motor soon began to warm up to the task. Like a flash, Jake and the old ear were on their way. The motor roared on through the falling Snow until the glimmer of colored lights - Christmas lights - came into view in the fashionable Hollywood homos. He stopped against the curb, climed out with the billfold under his arm, walked to the entrance of an apartment bullding, and pushed a doorbell. A well dressed lady opened the door and, after she had abserved the bulging leather bag under Jake's arm, Inquired; "What is it?"
"I wish to speak to Mrs. Turnbull," answered Jake.
"Sorry, but Mrs. Turnbull doesn't live here anymore."
Jake Philpot thought fast, and his squinting eye had just time to rest on the number on the telephone inside the hallway before the door closed in his face. He returned to the wet, sloughy street, but he did not stop walking until he had arrived at a comer drug store.
"May I use your telephone?" he asked the young soda jerker.
"Yes, sir."
Jake Philpot dialed the number he had in mind. When the answer came, he said! "I wish to speak to Mrs. Turnbull."
"Just a minute. Oh, Mrs. Turnbull ! The telephone! " Jake heard and recognized the voice. A moment passed, and then!
"Mrs. Turnbull speaking."
"Just wanted to find out if you ware in, Mrs. Turnbull, and could receive an important message. The carrier will be there in a few minutes."
"Why, yea, I'll be here, and I certainly thank you for being so nice as to call and tell me."
Jake Philpot retraced his steps and was soon beck at the apartment building. Again he pushed the doorbell. And again he found himself in the presence of that well dressed lady. He said; "I wish to speak to Mrs. Turnbull."
"I've told you once, sir, that Mrs. Turnbull does not live here any more." Before she could slam the door in Jake Pilpot's face, he replied, "Yes, I remember what you told me, but I happen to know that you didn't tell me the truth. I've just talked to Mrs. Turnbull over this telephone. Will you please be kind enough to ask her to coma and receive a message?"
Just than Mrs. Turnbull, who had heard and seen it all, came forward to relieve the situation. She paid in full - $200 - the amount she owed the Congaree furniture Company.
According to Jake Philpot, it mattered not to him how many times they slammed doors in his face. It made him all the more determined to make them pay what they owed the Congaree. Time after time, he said, they threatened him with physical or legal combat as a result of his cunningness and audacity. He invaded home after home in that fine residential section of the city, in an effort to make then pay what they owed the Congaree. If they had influential guests, or if they had a fashionable party under way in the home, Jake entered and announced; "We need that balance you owe the Congaree."
After his right eye had fallen into a squint, Jake explained his methods in dealing with the "highbrows," as he called them. "I gave them no opportunity to 'button-hole' me, shunt me to the shadows, and whisper an excuse in my ear, or sell me an alibi. I made them play 'Andy's puttin' on the dog,' while I stood in the presence of the 'big shots' they had around and wrote receipts in full for the piles of money they 'forked over' in order to get rid of me, an uninvited and totally unappreciated guest.
"When I'd get home at night to My little house out In Camp Fornance section of the city, it would oftentimes be 4:00 a.m. I'd be so tired, I wouldn't lie down to sleep, I'd fall down."
When asked if he managed to receive sleep sufficient to enable him to stand the strain of such a drive, he replied: "Oh, yes, I sleep with the social elect. And while they play, I work." By that, he meant he arranged his daily schedule so as to be up and about his duties as a collector while the people of a social turn of mind played.
While Jake Philpot never boasts of an accomplishment, or complains of hardship, he merely squints and relates a few of 'is experiences connected with the peculiar task he undertook during that trying period. He did, however, do what his boss had asked - "get out there and squint" until he collected. He could be seen pushing doorbell after doorbell in the fine residential sections of the city at night. During the daylight hours, he could be seen climbing staircases in tall office buildings; crawling from grimy boiler rooms; entering gambling halls, boot lag joints, and houses of ill fame. It mattered not to him what people thought of him or said to him, he only squinted and entertained one thought - a running Congaree.
When Manager Bacon looked up from the column of figures on his desk and saw the clock ticking away in his office, It was eleven o'clock. Two collectors had reported and were sitting near the big heater in the office, nodding. They were tired and sleepy. Nothing had been heard from Jake Philpot in three days.
"Oh, what's the use? It's impossible!" Manager Bason complained as he began stumbling over the little walnut and mahogany whatnots on the floor. He had smoked cigarette after cigarette, and the stubs were lying scattered here and there. He was groggy, and it was with a staggar that he walked.
The clock ticked on, and Manager Bason continued his staggering walk from front door to office and back again. From time to time, a smoke stand, a beautiful mirror, or some expensive doofunny would topple and fall from contact with his fiat or hand. Or Great beads of sweat had begun to show on his face. The clock ticked on, but Jake Philpot was not there. when the long hand neared the figure twelve on the dial, Manager Bason said: "It's all over." Just as he reached for the switch to atop the big electric sign on the front of the building, the door opened. It was Jake Philpot. For a moment, Jake stood with a little brown bag in his hand and a squint in his eye. Manager Bason lowered his upraised hand and inquired:
"Did you get it, Philpot?"
"I don't know, air,"' Jake answered, as he handed the little brown bag to his boss. It required only a moment's time for Manager Bason to learn that the balance needed was in that bag. Just as he was closing the heavy vault door in the office, the radio announcer said! "Happy New Year!" It was then one minute past twelve o'clock, on the morning of January 1, 1933, and bedlam had broken loose in the city. Gums fired, belle rung, car horns honked, and people cried and shouted. But Jake Philpot heard none of it, for he snored all the while on one of the soft beds in the Congaree.
While Jake Philpot slept, his boss, Manager Bason, celebrated with the crowds on the street. He was happy. While speaking of the matter years later, Mr. Bason said: "That night furnished the happiest, as well as the post horrible, hours of my life." He gives Jake Philpot full credit for the light, C-O-N-O-A-R-B-E, that has never failed. Jake credited it to the account of the kind lady he heard singing - Tor He Will Carry You Through" - that damp gloomy day in the Pacific Mill village when the snow flakes were falling thick and fast.
Jake Philpot was born February 8, 1870, on a little two-horse farm on Twenty Creek in Fairfield County, South Carolina. He is the son of James and Cora Philpot, whose parents came from Virginia. They were for many years members of Zion Methodist Church in the Bear Creek Community. They say that Mr. and Mrs. Philpot, Jake's parents, seldom missed a sermon at Zion. They required Jake and his five brothers end four sisters to attend preachings and Sunday School at Zion.
When Jake Philpot was seven years old, he started his education at Duke - a little one-room, one-teacher school near Twenty Creek. The old school building, he said, is still standing.
"Not long ago, I was at Duke and found a few landmarks I saw there fifty years ago when I was a student," remarked Mr. Philpot. He reached no further than about the seventh grade, including his education at Duka or elsewhere. His parents died when he was seventeen, and then Jake was left on his own. He had to work for a living.
He came to Columbia in 1888 and lived for a number of years with a married sister and her family. During that time, he sold newspapers on the streets of the city and was delivery boy for the John L. Mimnaugh store. His fir at regular job was obtained at the old state dispensary, at one dollar a day. He pasted labels on whiskey bottles for two years. "But I never touch strong drink," he casually remarked.
In 1903, Jake Philpot started his career as a furniture man, working first with the Van Meter store and then with P. O. Roberta & Company. In 1913, he became connected with the parent firm of the present Congaree Furniture Company, as a collector-salesman. For thirty years, he has pushed doorbells at fine homes and rapped on doors of many who could not afford doorbells. While he tells little about himself, he is rich in experience. He goes among the people and among his firmis customers in his quiet unassuming way. It matters not how humble the home, Jake is aver ready and willing to extend a friendly word and a helping hand. There la perhaps no one in Columbia who has come in contact with more joys and sorrows than "Old Jake Philpot." When he is confronted with a real problem, he usually squints until he sees a solution to that problem.
Not so long ago, he was asked when and how he acquired the habit of squinting his right eye and leaning his head to one aide while listening to a conversation. To this, he replied. "When I was a boy on our little Twenty Creek farm, there was a six-acre cottonfield that extended from the back yard of the house to the northern boundary of the fern. I heed and plowed cotton in that field. When the noon hour approached, I'd watch the shadow of a tell pine that stood in the front yard. When that shadow reached a certain point on the house, I knew it would be around 12 o'clock, time to quit for the refreshment I knew Mother had prepared. In looking at that shadow, the summer sun would bean down in my face so strongly that have to hold my head to one side end squint." Thus it was that Jake acquired the habit of squinting while thinking intently about a problem confronting him.
In February, 1890, Jake Philpot married Miss Margaret Epting of Camden, South Carolina. They have reared and educated four children - three girls end one boy - of whoa he speaks:
"I'm proud of them all, and I believe they will not forget the one thing that has been my pillow and guide through the years. I mean that line in the old hymn - He Will Carry You Through - Which I used to hear my mother sing while I toiled in that six-acre cottonfield just north of the house where I watched the pine's shadow.
Despite the falling snow, the pouring rain, the cold and the heat of winter, spring, summer and fall, Jake Philpot keeps pushing doorbells, end rapping where there are no bells, as a collector for the Congares. He weighs just 135 pounds; is gray-haired; is without his original teeth; but his five feet of manhood and courage are at ill with him. Like the Congaree, he flows on.
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximately 2,800 words
SOUTH CAROLINA. WRITERS ' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: THE CLOUDS BEYOND
Date of First Writing	February 15, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Jim Kelley (Negro)
Fictitious Name	Ham Cloud
Street Address	None
Place	Blythewood, S. C. (Rural Section)
Occupation	Tenant Farmer
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Name of Reviser	State Office
Up and down, up and down an old walkway flanked with spicy-scented boxwood in front of an old farm house strode Ham Cloud, and old gray-haired copper-colored Negro. The place, the old Ben Cloud farm, is located on the old Blythewood-Camden Road, six miles east of Blythewood, South Carolina. It was August 18, 1918, and war time. "Uncle Ham," as most every one in Bear Creek community called him, had just the day before said good-bye to two of his sons, who had been drafted into the Army. He was worried.
"Good morning, Uncle Ham!" said a white lady, past middle age, who sat on the rear seat of a car that had just stopped at the end of the walkway and was unnoticed by the old Negro.
"Honk, honk!" the car horn sounded, as the driver's hand pounded on the button at the end of the steering shaft.
Pausing in the walkway, Ham Cloud stood for a moment with his blinking eyelids shaded with a trembling hand. He then slowly approached the car at the end of the lane.
"Don't you know me, Uncle Ham?" inquired the lady in the car.
"Bless my life, if it ain't Miss Alice done come back to de old house ergin!" They shook hands.
"Uncle Ham, is there anything to cause you trouble this morning?"
"Miss Alice, I was jes' thinkin' 'bout all de trouble dat am caused at dis place by de debil and he wars."
"You think this war is the work of the devil, Uncle Ham?"
"Yes, ma'am, Miss Alice, I 'lows dis war bizness am de work of de debil. It sho is, caze I members de time when Marse Ben hafter give up his three boys to go to war. He say then de war am de work of de debil. And when Gin'al Sherman and he sojers come through here, what dey couldn't carry off dey destroy. I's worried 'bout my two boys what lef' here yestiddy for de war, for dey tells me dem Germans ain't nebber seed a nigger."
"Uncle Ham, do you remember when General Sherman's army came through this country, and what they did on this place?"
"I members all about it, Miss Alice. When us heard through some of Gin'al Wade Hampton's sojers dat de Yankees had done burnt Columby and was marchin' on to de North, stealin' and burnin' as dey go, me and Marse Ben got busy. I hope him to hide de things on de place out in de woods and fields." Ham then began to laugh.
"What happened then, Uncle Ham?"
"Lawd, hab mercy L Jes' 'a whole passel o' Yankees pass here. I was standin' in dis walk one day when a crowd of dem stop, and one axe me whar Marse Ben and all de folks. I say to him, 'I dunno; I jes' one o' de free niggers lef' to stay in our house and look after our things.'" Ham was then just a pickaninny twelve years old. But he was faithful, and he had diplomacy enough to save the Cloud family from loss.
Ham Cloud was born a slave in 1853, on the plantation of Benjamin Cloud in the Bear Creek section of old Fairfield District, South Carolina. His father is said to have had Arab blood in his veins and to have been a descendant of Oriental royalty. He was the plantation wheelwright and blacksmith. His wife, Ham's mother, was a servant in the Cloud home. Ham's early life was spent around the kitchen in the "big house" and in the farm workshop. He, therefore, came in close contact with the members of the Cloud household. He was granted many privileges, and they say he learned rapidly through precept and example. The Clouds taught him to do a little reading and scribbling.
Benjamin Cloud was a very religious old gentleman and often read the Scriptures to Ham and to other slaves on the place on Sunday. He encouraged his slaves to fear God and to hate the devil. Mr. Cloud, too, was a believer in the preservation of the Union during the controversy concerning Kansas and slavery. In Ham's presence one day, he spoke of war as the work of the devil. For the remainder of his life, Ham hated war and believed it the work of the devil.
When South Carolina seceded from the Union in December, 1860, and began to organize an army, Benjamin Cloud's three sons - Lafayette, Henry, and Oscar -enlisted in the State service. Later, they were sent to Virginia with General Johnson Hagood's brigade and were with the same when it made those famous charges which one historian spoke of as the most glorious chapter in South Carolina's military history. Henry Cloud fell at Weldon Field. Lafayette and Oscar received severe wounds, but they survived the war and returned home. None were gladder than Ham to see them return. They were his heroes and his idols, especially "Marse Fayette," the oldest of the Cloud brothers.
A few years after the close of the War Between the States, Benjamin Cloud passed away, leaving Lafayette in charge of the old Cloud home. Lafayette in the meantime had married and taken over the management of the farm. Oscar Cloud was of a more restless nature, and he traveled for a number of years before marrying. Ham Cloud remained with his young hero, Marse Fayette, and helped him to look after "our cows, our hogs, our sheep, our land, and our business."
During the reconstruction period and the Hampton campaign in South Carolina, in 1876, Ham Cloud was a member of the Democratic Party. He took great pride in donning his red shirt and at aping his hero, "Marse Fayette," as an enthusiastic supporter of General Hampton and white supremacy. His activity in this connection brought down on his head the wrath of many of his race, especially the females of the species. It caused him a lovers quarrel, they say, with his best girl, who's parents were staunch Republicans. They later buried the political hatchet, however, and were married.
Prior to Ham's marriage, his main job on the Cloud farm was to attend to the needs of the livestock on the place. Sheep, in addition to other domestic animals, were kept. Ham was very fond of a large ram in the flock which he named Sledgehammer. He was also the family coachman. On each Sunday, he accompanied the Clouds to Zion, a nearby Methodist Church, as driver of the carriage horses. He could have attended the religious services had he so desired, but Ham usually elected to spend the hours for worship in sleep in the family carriage or on the ground out in the grove in front of the Church.
The Cloud sheep would sometimes break away from their fold and ramble off to Zion Church grounds, and elsewhere, to graze and to get into mischief. They sometimes caused real embarrassment to their owner. At any rate, Ham's pet. Sledgehammer, came to Zion once, to his discomfort. The late Rev. William Barber, a kinsman of the Cloud family, told about this years later in a sermon entitled, "Why Should You Question Right To Be Here?" His comparison and narrative ran as follows:
"It was in midsummer and the weather was clear and warm that Sunday. It was so warm in the church that it was necessary to the comfort of all present to have all of the windows and doors open. The wide front entrance to the church was directly in front of the pulpit, and I could see out into the grove beyond the front lawn. In fact, I was the only one in the building who could very well have this view and be in a position to note the things that happened out there during the hour of my message. In the midst of my sermon, I saw Brother Lafayette Cloud's Negro driver, Ham, walk to a large pine tree and place himself on the ground by the side of that pine. His head soon began to nod in sleep. Just then a flock of sheep came bounding into view. Among them was a large vicious looking ram. He saw the young Negro, and evidently mistook his nodding head for a challenge to physical combat. The ram backed away a few yards to the front of the sleeping Negro, and then, for a few moments, he stood facing him. For every nod of Ham's head, the large sheep would give a nod of his head in return, in such a way that his brute mind may have prompted him to ask: 'Why should you question my right to be here?' They nodded until the ram could stand it no longer. He lowered his head, dug his rear hoofs into the ground, and charged. Even though Ham was not physically damaged, he was awakened by the compact to the danger of sleep at such a place and at such an hour."
While it may have required a sledgehammer blow from a huge ram's head to arouse Ham Cloud to his sense of duty on the Sabbath day, he did soon after the heady encounter begin to think and plan for the future. He was not too old to dream dreams, and he was not too young to see visions.
As the story goes, Ham's best girl, Corrie Perry, refused to marry him until he joined the church and became more religious- minded. He complied with the demand by joining at Shady Grove, the colored Methodist Church, in 1878. Corrie married him soon thereafter. During the summer of this same year, after Ham's and Corrie's wedding, the colored Methodists held a big revival meeting at Shady Grove. They had a lot of preaching about the devil and damnation. They shouted. Ham, too, saw visions and shouted on the crowded floor. In one of his hallelujah moods one day, he bounced too high. He butted his head against a low slung joist. Even though no damage was done either head or joist, this ended Ham's shouting and cost him a part of his religion, to boot. He is said to have cursed the deacons for having such a dangerous object so near the heads of converted sinners.
At the beginning of 1879, Mr. Lafayette Cloud sold to Ham, on credit, a good plow mule. He also set aside one of his "best tenant farms to Ham's and Corrie's use, as renters. In a further desire to assist Ham, Mr. Cloud gave him and Corrie, as a wedding present, one of his best grade Jersey milch cows, named Crump. Ham and Corrie were young and strong, and they started to farming with a vim. Ham's hopes for his future success were high. He could visualize himself the proud owner of broad acres and fine fat cattle. He wanted cattle and other livestock to help in the realization of his dreams, and it was his wish that Crump find heifer calves for him in order that he might expand his dairy herd.
While Ham and Corrie had good luck with their planting operations during their first few years as renters, Ham was doomed to disappointment in two of his ambitions. Corrie's first born was a daughter, which they named Mary. Crump, at about the. same time, presented him with a bull calf. A year later, Corrie presented him with another daughter, and Crump found him another bull calf. Ham's luck then took a turn for the better. One morning, in 1882, a son shined upon him. When he went out to his barnyard that morning to look after the needs of his livestock, he found a new-born heifer calf tugging away at Crump's udder. Ham's cup of joy was so full that he could think of nothing other than to run and report his good fortune to his friend and benefactor - "Marse Fayette." The following was his report, and the conversation that took place.:
"Marse Fayette, does you member 'bout de rabbit us kilt in de graveyard year befo' las'?"
"Why, yes, Ham But why do you ask?"
"Hit like dis, Marse Fayette. I been carryin' de left front foot off dat rabbit in my right-hand-pants pocket ever since, and my luck done change around."
"What has happened now, Ham?"
"I is gone to havin' boy babies and gal calves to come to my house."
"I'm glad to hear of your good fortune. Ham. What are you going to name your son?"
"Well, Marse Fayette, I names my first chile Mary, and my nex' chile Martha. So I reckon I hafter call dis one Lazarus."
With Mr. Cloud aiding and abetting, Ham and Corrie made progress with their farming operations and became highly respected in the Bear Creek community. He worked hard during those years. It was along about 1885 that Ham, in all probability, did the hardest day's work of his life. He bound into bundles seven acres of high-yielding oats, which was cut that same day with a grain cradle by his brother-in-law, Major Perry. He told later that he was so tired when night came that the witches rode him in his sleep that night to Camden, fifteen miles from his home. Quite incidentally, on this same night, Major Perry preached in his sleep. And for the remainder of his life he was a somnambulistic preacher. A few years after the oat-cutting experience. Major Perry moved to Saluda County. He was later with a traveling show, and became widely known for his habit, or affliction. The most remarkable part of it was that he outlined his text verbatim and preached in perfect English, despite his inability to read or write.
The tie of friendship that had developed between Ham and "Marse Fayette" in their younger life followed them through the years. Ham, they say, always depended on Mr. Cloud in the time of his troubles, and he was seldom denied. On the other hand, it was always Ham who Mr. Cloud wanted during his later years to accompany him when he traveled from home on business or other missions. They were at Ridgeway one day during an exciting political rally. It was in the early days of the Tillman campaign, and the lines were strongly drawn between the pro's and the con's. Mr. Cloud became involved in a friendly argument with one not sharing his view of the situation. "When the argument became a little-heated, Ham butted in as follows:
""White folks, if you finds you can't settle de argumentation widout havin' to use your fists, please don't hit Marse Fayette; hit dis nigger."
The long companionship between Lafayette and Ham Cloud came to an end a few months after Ham's demonstration at Ridgeway. The friendship and Ham's loyalty, however, lasted to the end. In the fall of 1894, Lafayette Cloud accidentally lost his balance and fell from a wagon piled high with new-mown hay. Ham it was who reached him first. And it was Ham who picked up his broken body and bore him to his deathbed. Hr. Cloud passed away two weeks later and was buried in Zion churchyard.
Soon after the death of Lafayette Cloud, his family began to drift away from the Bear Creek community in search of their fortunes in other fields. A few years later, Mrs. Cloud, his wife, passed away. The old home ties being then broken, the remainder of the Cloud children left the community. Ham and his family, however, remained on the Cloud farm and were later given permission to occupy the "big house."
After an absence of many years from Bear Creek, a daughter of the late Lafayette Cloud visited her old home. This was on August 18, 1918, during the World War. She found Ham walking up and down the old walkway in front of her old home. He was in grief over the loss, as he felt, of his two sons, Lazarus and Mood, who had just the day before been drafted into the United States Army. "When he recognized "Miss Alice," as she was always known to him, his cup of joy once more was filled. But he did not allow himself the luxury of tears; he fought them back determinedly till he could laugh again.
According to information furnished by "Miss Alice," who is now nearly eighty years old, and living in Columbia, South Carolina, Ham Cloud raised eight children, and sent them to school as much as his income would permit. All of them are married and are proving themselves useful citizens in their chosen fields. Several went North, where they received college educations. One of his sons owns and operates a splendid farm in Richland County. Another son, Mood Cloud, while still a tenant, is considered one of the best farmers in Bear Creek.
In 1932, at the age of seventy-nine years, Ham Cloud passed away at the old Cloud home. His many friends, both white and black, came from far and near to attend his funeral. He was buried at Shady Grove, only a short distance from Zion, where sleeps "Marse Ben and Marse Fayette." An old broken lamp was put on his grave by one of his children. They say it was once used by Lafayette Cloud as a reading lamp, and sometimes they put flowers in it. Perchance it, through a friendly spirit, enabled Ham to see the light on the Bible's teachings of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. However that might be, the old lamp now gives light on the Clouds beyond.
Approximately 2,800 words
SOUTH CAROLINA. WRITERS ' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: A TIE THAT BOUND
Date of First Writing		February 15, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed		Jim Kelley (Negro)
Fictitious Name		Ham Cloud
Street Address		None
Place		Blythewood, S. C. (Rural Section)
Occupation		Tenant Farmer
Name of writer		John Dove
Name of Reviser		State Office
"Do debil and he wars," muttered Ham Cloud, on old gray-haired, copper-colored Negro, as he strode up and down, up and down the old walkway. The place, the old Ben Cloud farm, is located on the old Blythewood- Camden road, six miles east of Blythewood, South Carolina. It was August 18, 1918, and war time.
"Honk, honk!" "the auto horn sounded, as the driver's hand pounded on the button at the end of the steering shaft.
"Good morning, Ham! Don't you know me?" inquired a gray-haired whit. lady, who had just stopped at the front of the old farm house.
Pausing between the rows of spicy-scented boxwood, the old Negro stood for a moment with his blinking eyelids shaded with a trembling hand. He then slowly approached the cur at the end of the lane. At last he saw and recognized the lady who had spoken to him.
"Bless my life, if it ain't Miss Alice done come back to do old place again!" They shook hands.
"Ham, is there anything to cause you trouble this morning? You appear worried."
"Miss Alice, I was jes' thinkin' 'bout all de trouble dat an caused at dis place by de debil and he wars."
"You think this war is the work of the devil. Ham?"
"Dat I do, dat I do, Miss Alice. I 'lows dis war bisness am de work of de debil. It sho' is, caze I members 'bout de time when Marse Ben hafter give up he three boys for de war. He say then dat war am de work of de debil. So when Gin'al Sherman and ho sojers comes through here, day proves it - what dey couldn't carry off dey destroy. I's wor'ed 'bout my two boys what lef' here yestiddy for de war, for dey tells me dem Germans ain't nebber seed a nigger."
"Ham, you say you remember when General Sherman' a army came through this country, and what they did?"
"I members all 'bout it, Miss Alice. When us heard through some of Gin'al Wade Hampton's sojers dat de Yankees had done burnt Columby down and was marchin' on to de No'th, stealin' and burnin' as dey go, ma and Marse Ben got busy. I hope him to hide de things on de place out in de woods end de fields." He began to laugh.
"'What happened then, Ham."
"Lawd, hab mercy! Jes' a whole passel o' Yankes pass right by dis houss. I was standin' in dis walk one day when a crowd of den, all dress up in day blue uniform, stop at do gate. One ask ne whar Marse Ben and all de folks. I says to him, 'Suh, I dunno; I jes' one o' deifree niggers lef' to stay in our house and look attar our things.' Yes'm, I's twelve years ole den, and I members it well."
"You are right, Ham. You were just twelve years old; for you were born in February, 1853, a slave on my grandfather's plantation. Your father, I have been told, had Arab blood in his veins and was a descendent of Oriental royalty. He was the plantation wheelwright and blacksmith. His wife, your mother, was a servant in the home; and you, consequently, spent much of your early life around the kitchen and farm workshop. Grandfather taught you to do a little reading and scribbling, did he not?"
"Dat he do, dat he do, Miss Alice. And, further mo', he reads de Bible to me and to de other niggers on de place on Sunday. And, Miss Alice, he sho' was agin dis war bizness. I hear him say one day, when dey was havin' all dat argyment 'bout Kansy, or some place lak dat way out yonder, dat hit was gwine cause de debil to git turn loose. But in spite of all he could say and do, de white folks kep' on talkin' and gittin more and more excited 'bout de niggers till de war comes."
"That's right, Ham, the State seceded from the Union in December, 1860, and organized an army- My father and his two brothers, Henry and Oscar enlisted in the State service. Later, they were sent to Virginia with General Johnson Hagood's brigads and were with that brave band at Walthall Junction, Drury's Bluff, and Weldon Field. Uncle Henry fell in that famous charge at Weldon Field on August 21, 1846. Father and Uncle Oscar ware among the few who surrendered to General Sherman at Hillsboro, North Carolina; and they came home soon thereafter."
"Yes'm, I 'members do very day dey comes home. I was out minin' de two cows what was lef' on do place after Gin'al Sherman and he sojers pass.
I look up and I see two raggedy-lookin' men comin' down do road, and I say to my self, 'Ham, I believes one of den sojers la Master Fayetts, sho' as you bawn.' So when day got on down de road where I wuz, one say, 'Who's nigger you is, boy?' I says, 'I's Han, and still your nigger. Master Faystte.' And I was sho' glad, Miss Alice, to see 'em cone home."
"Yes, Ham, I know all must have been glad the war was over and our heroes at home again. But, for sons reason, Uncle Oscar wasn't satisfied with a quiet life at home, and he soon went on his way to the West. Father was different; he wished to settle down and live a quiet life. Grandfather died, you know, two years after the boys cams home from the war, and that left Father and you in charge if the farm."
"Yuh know, Wise Alice, Waster Fayette always seem lak a great big brudder to me atter ole Marse Ben died. It was lak dis wid me - I knowed dat I would always be jes' a nigger, and I didn't want nobody 'cept Master Fayette and other members of de Cloud family to be callin' me nigger. When I wasn't lookin' after our cows, hawgs, sheep, and other things on our place, I rid with Master Fayette and de udder red shirt white folks. Kack, kack, kack!
"What are you laughing about, Ham."
"Yuh know, Miss Allice, all de sho' nuff niggers aroun' de Bear Greak settlement was listnin' to all dat talk 'bout forty acres and a rule dat was bain' put out at dat time by po' white trash from de No'th so's to git de crazy niggers to keep 'em in office so day could steal our money we paid for tax. I was flyin' 'round Corria Parry at de time. All her folks was votin' wid de 'Publicans and Sinners at dat time. So she say to me one day, 'Honey, I hafter quit lovin' you efan you don't quit wearin' dat red shirt.8"
"Yes, Ham, I recall how you looked after the livestock, drove the carriage horses for us, and rods with my father as a Red Shirt in the Hampton campaign. But it required Sledgehammer, your pet ram, and Corrie, your beat girl, to make you wake up and become religious. Ham, I have a copy of one of Cousin William Barber's sermons. You know he once preached at Zion, the church to which you drove the family carriage for us so long. After Cousin William left the Zion charge, he told a story about you in one of his sermons."
"Wh-wh-what he preach about me, Miss Alice?" inquired Ham Cloud, with a puzzled look on his wrinkled face.
After "Miss Alice" had pushed back her gray hair and adjusted her glasses, she took from her handbag a bit of paper yellowed with age. Then she said, "Ham, I've brought this with me to read to you, as I felt you'd be interested. It's a copy of a part of that sermon." She began:
"'It was in midsummer, and the weather was clear and warm that Sunday.
It was so warm in the church that it was necessary to the comfort of all present to have all of the windows and doors open. The wide front entrance to the church was directly in front of the pulpit, and I could see out into the grove beyond the front lawn. In fact, I was the only one in the building who could very well have that view and be in position to note the things that happened out there during the hour of my message. In the midst of my sermon, I saw Brother Lafayette Cloud's Negro driver, Ham, walk to a large pine and seat himself on the ground by the side of that tree. His head soon began to nod in sleep. Just then a flock of sheep came bounding into view. Among them was a large vicious-looking ram. He saw the young Negro and evidently mistook his nodding head for a challenge to physical combat. The ram hacked away a few yards to the front of the sleeping Negro end then, for a few moments, he stood facing him. For every nod of Ham's head, the large sheep would give a nod of his head in return, in such a way that his brute mind may have prompted him to ask. 'Why should you question my right to be here?' They nodded until the ram could stand it no longer. He lowered his head, dug his hoofs into the ground, and charged. Even though Ham Cloud was not physically damaged, he was awakened by the compact to the danger of sleep at such a place and at such an hour.'"
"Dat am de whole truth, Miss Alice. Ole Sledgehammer hit me so hard dat day I saw stars in Hebben. He sho' knock some sense in my head. He put me to dreamin' so hard dat I 'gin to see visions of cattle, sheep, and goats on de hillsides. And after 'gits thor'ly 'roused I goes right straight to Cirris's house dat nex' night and say to her, 'Corrie, I's a change man; I is gwine to jine de church and live in de harves' till I die. I want you to he'p me make my dream come true.' She was only too glad dat I come, and us vent right straight on de nex' day and git married. And you 'member Miss Alice, dat very same preacher, Mr. Barber, 'form de ceremony for me and Corrie right here in de big house parlor in de presence of Master Fayette and all of you."
"I remember the day you and Corrie got married very well- It was on August 2, 1878, and was during what we used to call lay-by time on the farm. We were having a protracted meeting at Zion, and the colored Methodist in the community were having protracted meeting at Shady Grove at the same time. You joined Shady Grove then, didn't you. Ham?"
"Dat's sho' right, Miss Alice. Me and Corrie was so happy after our weddin' dat us got up on de flo' and shout. I bounce so high one night dat I hit my head on de low joist in de church. Den befo' I knowed it I loss part of my 'ligion and cues right out befo' de officers of de church, and dey come nigh turnin' me out de church befo' I hardly gits in it."
"But you did settle down after that, and you and Corrie went to work for my father as a tenant farmer on the Baxter place. He sold you, on credit, a plow mule and gave you Crump, the milk cow. He knew of your ambitions, and he wanted to help you."
"Yes'm, Master Feyette was sho' good to me, and I tried to show my 'preciation by workin' hard. But somehow it look like things wouldn't turn out right for me durin' of de fust few years me and Corrie went to farmin'. I wanted my fust bawn chillun to be boys, and I wanted Crump to fin' heifer calves for me. It turnt out de other way 'round, and I finds myself with two daughters and two bull calves on hands. But when de year 1882 comes, my luck change; and I Jus' had to run tell Master Fayette 'bout it. When I foun' him, I say:
"'Marse Fayette, does you member 'bout de rabbit us kilt in de graveyard year befo' las?'"
"'Why, yes, Ham. But why do you ask'"
"'Hit like dis, Marse Fayette. I been carryin' do loft front foot off dat rabbit in my right-hand-pant a pocket ever since, and my luck dons change 'round.'"
"'What has happen', Ham?' he say.
"'I's gone to havin' boy babies and gal calves to come to my house.'"
"'I'm glad to hoar of your good luck. What are you going to name your son?' he ask me.
"Den I say, 'Well, Harse Fayette, I name my first chile Mary, and my nex' chile Martha. So I reckon I hafter call do one bawn today, Lazarus.'"
'"Yes, Fathor knew how ambitious you were and how hard you worked, and he wanted to help you. Ham, I have never understood how it was possible for you to bind into bundles, in one day, that seven-acre field of high- yielding oats your brother-in-law, Major Parry, out with a grain cradle that hot day in June, 1885."
"Lawd, Miss Alice, dat was do hardes' days work I ever did do in my life. I was so tired when night come dat I fell down and dream a curious dream all night long. When mornin' come, I still tired. You know, Miss Alice, I dream so hard dat night I foun' out later when I woke up dat do witches had ride me plumb to Camden and back - thirty miles."
"And quite incidentally," commented Miss Alice, "Major Perry preached in his sleep that same night. And he continued to preach in his sleep for the remainder of his life, I understand. He moved from Bear Creek, in 1890, to Saluda County, and from there he went with a traveling show to demonstrate his habit, or affliction. He outlined his text verbatim and preached in perfect English, despite his inability to read or write. (The State: Dec. 9,10,12, 1906.)
"You know, Ham, we have always appreciated your staying on with my father and the help you gave to him during his last years. It was you he always wanted to accompany him whoa he traveled from home on business or any other mission. The last trip you ever made with him was to Ridgeway dnning the summer of 1894. It was during the early days of the Tillman campaign, and the political lines were strongly drawn between the Tillmanites and the anti- Tillmanites. Father, I understand, became engaged in a friendly, yet heated, argument over politics."
"He do. He sho' do. And I was standin' right dar by him. Seein' as how dey was gettin' purty loud lak, I say: 'White folks, if yuh find a yuh can't settle do argumentation widout havin' to use your fists, please don't hit Marse Fayette; hit die nigger.'"
"Yes, yours and Father's friendship lasted to the end. He died soon after the trip to Ridgeway. And it was you who picked up his broken body after his fall from the wagon piled high with new-mown hay and placed him on his deathbed.
"Miss Alice, do Lawd has sho' been good to me. I done live to see Marse Ben and Marse Fayette sad your good mother put away at Zion Church. And I done live to see Mary, Martha, Lazarus, and Mood, ay chillun, grow up. I have sont 'em to school sad done de bes' I could for 'em. Mary and Martha went to de No'th whar dey finish dey schoolin' to be teachers among de niggers in Now York. So dar nobody lef' here now but me and Corrie. But Miss Alice, I's gwine live on die lan' - on dis here Cloud place - and work in de harves' fiel' till I die."
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximately 3,000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LITE HISTORY
TITLE: WINDMILL ORCHARD
Data of First Writing	January 12, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Emanual Schumpert
Fictitious Name	Ed Leightsey
Post Office Address	West Columbia,
County	South Carolina Lexington
Occupation	Farmer & Market Gardener
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Name of Reviser	State Office
It was just before Christmas of 1938. The Columbia curb market was thronged with shoppers who were making choice selections from the limitless assortment of poultry, fresh vegetables, fruits and other things for holiday tables. Under a sign marked Windmill Orchard stood Ed Leightsey, proprietor of that stall. He was a stocky old gentleman of about average height; his hair was thin and gray; and his face, rather pallid, was lighted with a smile. It was not just a business-getting smile, but one that expressed the warmth of genuine human kindness. And those stopping act his stall, or even looking his way, were greeted with that smile and his beat wishes for their holiday season.
"Good morning, and a merry Christmas to you," he said to the writer, who was standing near the neatly arranged piles of fruit a and vegetables under the sign. "What can I do for you today?"
"Give me your money or your life story, Mr. Leightsey," the writer responded with mock gravity. 'Which shall it be?"
"A hold up, eh?" the old gentleman said, his smile changing to wonderment at the peculiar order.
"Nothing less, Mr. Leightsey, with the Market Master aiding and abetting. He has just told me of the great success you've made of your business on this market and said, 'See old Ed Leightsey, if you want to get a good story of a good man and a good farmer.' That's a rather heavy charge, Mr. Leightsey. I'm asking you to prove to me your innocence or your guilt."
"I plead not guilty," he answered, his smile returning as he caught the significance of the request.
"I'm from Missouri, Mr. Leightsey. You'll have to show me."
"Oh, well," he said, laughing good-naturedly, "you kind of had me on the dangle. I'll be glad to tell you what little there la to tell, but I don't think it will excite you much."
He turned to his wife, a small brunette of around sixty, who had arrived within the last minute or two and was listening to out conversation. "Minnie, where'd be the best place to start telling?"
"Just anywhere, but don't forget our school days and our trip to Charleston."
Minnie then proceeded to serve the wants of the numerous shoppers who stopped to look at the display under the sign and left Ed or "He", as she frequently refers to him, to tell the story.
"Give the story in your way and in your own words, Mr. Schumpert," the writer suggested by way of making a start.
"Well, all right, here goes," he began. "I was born in Lexington County, South Carolina, on January 3, 1871. So you see I'm past my sixty- seventh birthday. I want through what they would now call, I reckon, the seventh or sight grads at school. Anyway, I studied the old blue-back speller, the dictionary, Reed and Kellogg's grammar, history, arithmetic, through stocks and bonds, and the big geography that had the pictures of wild animals and big snakes living among the trees in the jungles. I quit school at twenty years of age and got a job with the Danville Lumber Company at Dixiana, South Carolina.
"After working with the sawmill at Dixiana for two years, I used my savings and bought a mule and a few farm tools. And, like the callow youth I was, I pitched my tent in that God-forsaken sandhill community around Dixiana and started to farming. The land in that community was, and still is, so poor that the only use we Lexingtonians can find for it is a sort of space filler, or just so much poor sand put there to hold the world together. Yes, sir, Dixiana is one of the few places in the world where you can be out of sight of land and water all at the same time.
"Well, of course, I had no trouble in renting enough land at Dixiana for a one-horse farm. And I got down to work with a vim in the spring of 1894. Soon I had the land prepared and crops planted. The seasons were very good that year, and my cotton and corn, my punkins and potatoes, and my other crops bloomed on those fresh acres. But as luck would have it, the bumblebees and caterpillars found those lowly blossoms and admired them so much that they charged upon them, wearing themselves, and the crops, out against the ground."
"Pardon the interruption Mr. Leightsey, but I have always understood that bumblebees do no harm to crops. In fact, I have been taught that bumblebees are quite helpful to crops, in that they assist with pollination."
"That's just it," he agreed. "You see, we old-timers used to speak of the poor dwarfy cotton stalks which produce no more than one or two blossoms as bumblebee cotton. You know, a bumblebee is a rather heavy insect, and, in our imagination, we could see the puny little cotton bend to the ground under the bee's weight,'
"Oh, yea, I get the meaning now. Hr. Leightsey. Won't you please go on with the story?"
"After my failure at Dixiana, my daddy, Jacob Laightsey, persuaded me to return home near New Brookland, now known as We at Columbia. So I swallowed my pride, mounted my little mule, and returned, like the prodigal son, to the land of my father. At the beginning of 1895, I went to work as a one- horse sharecropper for daddy. I slept is the back room of a little commissary store, and cooked and ate, my scant rations in the same room for two years.
"In 1897, I bought, mainly on credit, twenty acres of my daddy's land. On this land, I built a small four-room cabin for my use in my future operations and ambitions, or troubles, I should say."
Just then he winked an eye and shook his big corny fiat at Minnie. This done, he went on telling the thought in his mind concerning the four-room cabin.
"In the fall of 1897, I married that old battle-axe standing over there on the opposite side of the counter, and then my troubles really began. I once thought she was pretty Minnie Berry. My! how she could always manage to find A seat by the aide of me when we were in school and sat on the slab benches placed around the fireplace in the old schoolhouse."
"Look out there old man!" some one was heard to yell, as 'He' was seen backing away from a threatening piece of packing case held by the belligerent appearing Minnie- All of this was, of course, a demonstration of the good- humored badinage frequently exchanged between Ed and Minnie.
According to Minnie, who by this time had joined Ed in the discussion, the years 1898 to 1908 were critical and eventful ones for them. While Ed continued to "pull the bell-cord over his mule," Minnie cooked and washed and "nursed Ed and the children." He explained how he had developed his land to a high state of cultivation by a judicious combination of crop rotations, home-made fertilizer and liberal plantings of cowpeas and other legumes.
"And just as fast as we could produce fruits and vegetables, eggs and chickens, and other things sufficient to pay the coat of one block of twenty acres of my daddy's farm, we obligated ourselves to buy an adjoining twenty acres of the old farm. I found, all the while, a ready market for our produce among the people living in the city across the Congaree River, six miles away.
Ed Leightsey has the reputation of being strictly honest and fair in all of his dealings, and they say he has always given and demanded the full pound, down to the "twentieth part of one poor scruple." Gossip among his neighbors has it that on one occasion, when he sold a load of produce to a Columbia buyer, he figured all the way home, balancing his accounts. Finding a mistake of twenty cents against his favor, he hauled in his reins and drove back to town for the difference. Nobody would question the fact that he would have done the same thing had the "boot been on the other leg."
"Yes, Minnie and I worked hard during those years, and luck was with us," Ed continued after a number of pauses in order to extend the season's greetings to a group of his friends and customers shopping at his stand. "Our acres increased rapidly, as did our family. After ten years of work and 'penny-pinching', we owned my daddy's entire farm of 135 acres Minnie and I then agreed that the time had come for us to take our long delayed honeymoon vacation, the trip to Charleston she mentioned act the beginning of our conversation. Well, maybe I'd better let her tell about that, for I believe she got more out of the trip than I did."
Here he had Minnie take over the telling of the belated honeymoon.
"You see, it's like this," she began. "He has never wanted much said about that Charleston trip. Well, I finally persuaded him that he needed to get away from the farm for a few days. So during the winter of 1908, he agreed that we should go to Charleston, and to Charleston we went. Everything went lovely until we reached the city by the sea; then trouble, as well as fun, began for me. Neither of us had before seen the ocean, and, of course, we were not familiar with boats and boating. When we looked out upon those rolling waves of water, I decided it would be nice for us to take a boat ride around the bay. I wanted to get a close view of Fort Sumter and other places we had read about. But when I told Ed of my desire, He bucked like a stubborn old mule and said: 'Why Minnie, the very idea! I have always felt there was just about as much water in Congaree River as I would care to undertake to pull you out of in case of an accident to us in crossing. I just can't risk your life out there in that pond.' How do you believe he really cared so much for my welfare?" she leaned close and asked in a subdued tone.
At this juncture, friend 'He' stalked over on the opposite side of the piles of produce and, facing Minnie with his shaking fist, barked the following good-natured banter: "And I've wished many a time since, that I had carried you out there in the Atlantic Ocean and thrown you overboard."
"Yes, and then I could have caught a better fish from the sea than I caught out of it!" she hurled back at him.
The short vacation over, Minnie and Ed returned home. The old ancestral farm and home had been paid for and was now their property. It was explained somewhat in detail by Ed Leightsey how he and his better half went about making improvements on their property. New barns were built for the livestock and poultry in accordance with plans furnished by the Clemson College Extension Division. Improved breeds of hogs, cows, and poultry ware installed in place of the scrub and mixed breads formerly kept. A new peach orchard, a grape vineyard, and a flower garden were planted. Later, the pastures were newly fenced and sodded to adapted clovers and grasses. And, finally, the old log residence was remodeled and painted, and a windmill, with which to pump water into the horns and to the barns, was installed. Thus it was the farm became known as windmill Orchard.
It is said that Ed Leightsey never lets up in his search for ways and means of making improvements at Windmill Orchard. And his marketing methods are much superior to the average method on the curb market. His description of his marketing experience was as follows:
"I've found this curb system a great improvement over the old street peddling system we once had in Columbia. I sort (meaning grade) every pound of my produce; then put it up in even weight boxes or basket a before offering it for sale. There are no little potatoes at the bottom of the basket and big potatoes at the top. They are all alike in sixe, color, and quality in the pack. I've been in this business long enough to know that I must give my customers what they want and that which they feel they have bought. In this way, one satisfied customer generally makes another customer for my stand here. My gross sales from this curb stand amounts to around $3,000 a year."
It is claimed by Mr. Leightsey that he has crossed and re-crossed Congaree River for forty-one years, with loads of produce for the Columbia market. He now makes weekly, often semi-weekly, end sometimes daily deliveries of produce to his stand on the curb market. Long before the newsboys begin their chant, "Morning State," on the streets of the city, Ed and Minnie can be seen driving up Gervais Street in their flivver, loaded to its gunwales with potatoes, turnips, chickens, melons, peaches, grapes, and other things in season - all ready for sale when the market opens at an early morning hour. "I never let the grass grow under my feet," la one of his ways of expressing his stirring habit a. Ed, they say, never walks to his work; he runs.
"Mr Leightsey, I understand you Dutch farmers of Lexington County have fed the people of Columbia since the Civil War. Is that correct?"
"You bet I have furnished my share of the eats," was his answer. He then went on explaining how his ancestors, and the grand-parent a of other Lexington farmers, had been pushed back into the poorer sandhills by the old landed aristocracy in the early days of the State. With the old smile, which seldom leaves his face, he concluded with the remark; "Well, I guess 'every dog has his day." I'm having very good luck with my sales of produce among many of the descendants of those splendid old aristocrats."
While Ed Lightsey says you can bet on his having helped feed the people of Columbia, you can bet your "bottom dollar," with safety, that he has fed those eleven children of his at the fountainhead. Judging from the hale and hearty appearance of the ones seen by the writer, they must have been "buttermilk fed chickens."
Yes, Ed Leightsey claims that he and Minnie have reared eleven children, six sons and five daughters, at windmill Orchard, and that each has been given a high school education. "They are all married and gone now," he said, apparently with a feeling of regret. "Iris la a building contractor; Vernon, a lumber dealer; John runs a garage; Arney is a textile worker; and Charles is a farmer. The girls are now Mesdames, Sturkey, Williamson, Jeffcoat, Senn, and Sharpe."
Even though the songs and cries of the Leightsey children are heard no more around the old home, Ed and Minnie keep the home fires burning. And they say they have no desire to "let up" in their work of gardening and marketing. They continue to cross and re-cross Congaree River each day, except Sunday, on their way to and from their produce at and on the Columbia curb market. And there, under the sign Windmill Orchard, they carry on, side by side, as was their wont in their childhood days at the old backwoods school.
With an expression on his broad face that bespoke emotion, Mr. Leightsey said: "We are looking forward to the Christmas holidays, when we hope to be able once more to hear the voices of children singing the Christmas songs we loved to hear in the years gone by." These, he meant, of course, would be the voices of his grandchildren.
Having so often heard of Windmill Orchard and its well kept environs, the writer had many times felt the urge to visit the farm. The opportunity came during the past year. He found it, in truth, a well-kept farm. It is located on a county road, six miles west of Congaree River bridge - the concrete a pan that separates the city of Columbia from the town of West Columbia. There are the 135 acres which Ed and Minnie had bought in the early years of their married life. Some of it is on the streams, where there is the choicest of grazing for cattle, sheep, and hogs; other portions of the estate contain forests of the lordly long loaf pin: and others again are the well-cultivated fields, orchards, and vineyards. In close proximity to the modern livestock and poultry hams is an old well-preserved two-story residence, built of logs hewn from rich yellow pines - timber known through the ages for its ability to withstand the storms and ravages of time. There, too, a windmill slowly turned in the gentle breeze of the morning at its task of raising and lowering the long pump shaft over the well.
Despite the fact that the place, like Ed Leightsey, is showing signs of age, the look on Ed's face that morning was in keeping with the day, bright and sunny- When he was informed that his visitor wished to familiarise himself with the farm's many interests, it apparently gave him pleasure to conduct the tour of inspection and to tell of his methods concerning the conduct of the farm- In addition to the flock of pure-bred poultry cackling in the barnyard, the place was alive with the birds of the air; even the rat-a-tat-tat of a woodpecker, tearing at the bark of a nearby pine in machine-gun-like precision, was in evidence- The rattle of cow bells, the grunt of pigs, and the hum of bees were heard; and the odor of flowers filled the air- Joy, too, was abroad in the land; for in the mulberry tree near the pig lot, a number of happy greasy-faced pickaninnies were heard to yodle, 'hi-le-i-la-he-hoo.'
Ed Leightsey, progressive in his farm management methods and of a practical turn of mind, had no particular interest in legislation or politics- "Farm legislation can have but little meaning to me," he said- "I have always lived and boarded at the same place."
By that, he means that he produces his fruits and vegetables, bacon and hominy, milk and honey, and, in short, his living at Windmill Orchard.
Approximately 2,800 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE HE AND THE OLD WOMAN
Date of First Writing	January 12, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Emanuel Schumpert (white)
fictitious Name	Ed Leightsey
Address	West Columbia, S. c.
County	Lexington
Occupation	Marmar and Market Gardener.
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Name of Reviser	State Office
"As fresh as the water in the Congaree," shouted Ed Leightsey, as he patted the tender green leaves of a huge collard lying on a counter under a big signboard marked WINDMILL ORCHARD - Peaches and Grapes - on the long curb market. "Top of the morning to you, air! Yes, air, it's collards today from over the river, and they are good," he greeted the writer that chilly morning in December, 1938.
When the old gentleman was told that his collards needed no further advertising, a smile lighted his wrinkled sun-tanned face; not just a business-getting smile, but one that expressed the warmth of human kindness. People stopping at his market stall, or even looking his way, were greeted with that smile and his beat wishes.
"But why do you say that?" he inquired.
"Because the market inspector placed his approval on your collards when he said just a little while ago, 'If you want a story of a good man and a good farmer, see old Ed Leightsey down on the 1100 block of Assembly Street.' And it's yours, not the collard's story that is wanted, Mr. Leightsey. See?"
"Fresh collards, fresh Congaree----Oh, yes, yes, the market inspector. He's always pulling things on me." Grinning good-naturedly, he inquired, "A story did you say?" oh, well, I'll be glad to tell what little there is to tell, but I don't think it will excite you much."
He turned to Mrs. Leightsey, his wife, a small gray-haired woman of around sixty years, and inquired, "Minnie, where'd be the best place to start telling of our troubles?"
"Just anywhere you wish, Ed, but don't forget our school days and our trip to Charleston."
While Mr. Leightsey was left to tell the story of his and Minnie's troubles, Mrs. Leightsey attended to the wants of the many shoppers who stopped to price the neatly arranged piles of onions, cabbage, collards, turnips, potatoes, pecans, peanuts, eggs, fruits, and flowers. All of this, except the apples and citrous fruits, had been produced at Windmill Orchard - the Leightsey farm - six miles west of Congaree River and the town of West Columbia.
Nodding in the direction of the Congaree, he bagan: "I was born just over the river, a few miles in Lexington County, on January 3, 1871. So you see I'm past my sixty-seventh birthday. I went through what they would call, I reckon, the seventh or eighth grade at school. Anyway, I studied the old blue-back speller, the dictionary, Reed and Kellogg's grammar, history, arithmetic, through stocks and bonds, and the big geography that had the pictures of wild animale and big snakes living among the trees in the jungles. I quit school at twenty years of age to take a job with the Danville Lumber Company at Dixiana, South Carolina, et seventy-five cents a day and my board.
"Well, sir, Dixiana is one of the few places in the world where one can be out of eight of land and water all at the same time. It's not far from where I was born, and I know every pig path and cow track in it. Like the greenhorn I was, I took a notion that I could grow farm crops on that land. So, after two years at the sawmill, I quit my job and used the money I'd saved to buy a mule and a few farm tools. I pitched my tent, early in 1894, on some cut-over land in that God-forsaken sandhill community and started to farming. The land around Dixiana was, and still is, so poor that the only use we Lexingtonians can find for it is a sort of space filler, or Just so much poor sand put there to hold the world together. That's why I just said that Dixiana is one of the few places where one can be out of sight of land and water all at the same time.
"Well, of course, I had no trouble in renting enough land at Dixiana for a one-horse farm. And I got down to work like a smart fellow in the spring of 1894. Soon I had the land prepared and my crops planted. The seasons wore very good that year, and my cotton and corn, my punkins and taters, and my other crops bloomed on that fresh sand. But, as luck would have it, the bumblebees and caterpillars found those lowly blossoms and admired them so much that they changed upon them, wearing themselves and the blossoms out against the ground.
"You know we old-timers used to look upon the poor little cotton stalks that produced no more than one or two blossoms as bumblebee cotton. The bumblebee is a pretty heavy bee, end I've seen the puny cotton stalks bend to the ground under its weight when it lit in a blossom to such honey.
"Well, I made a failure, and a big'un, at trying to farm on that poor land at Dixiana- My daddy, Jacob Leightsey, heard about it and came to see me. He persuaded me to return with him to the old home near West Columbia. so I swallowed my pride, mounted my little mule, called my dog, and returned, like the prodigal son, to the land of my father.
"At the beginning of 1895, I went to work as a one-horse sharecropper for my daddy. I slept in the back room of a little commissary store and cooked and ate my scant rations of meat and bread and buttermilk in the same room for two years. I worked hard, too, during those years at growing corn, melons, taters, tomatoes, beans, turnips, and a little cotton. Luck was with me, and I was able to produce a lot of stuff to sell in Columbia. After giving my daddy one-fourth of the receipts for rant, I had $800 saved at the beginning of 1897."
At this point in his narrative, Ed Leightsey paused for a moment to refresh his memory on an important event in his younger days. Then he continued, "When 1897 came, I did a very wise thing - I bought, mainly on credit, twenty acres of my daddy's land and built thereon a four-room cottage."
He paused again just long enough to walk around to the opposite side of the counter from where Mrs. Leightsey was standing. Squinting in the direction of the "old woman", as he oftentimes refers to Minnie, he sighed and remarked: "I then did a very foolish thing - I bought a buggy." Mrs. Leightsey. Hearing the remark, looked around just in time to see his big left fist upraised and shaking in the direction of her face, and to hear him say, "And in the fall of 1897, I married that 'old battle-axe' standing over there. Then my troubles really began. I once thought she was pretty Minnie Berry. My! how she could always manage to find a seat by the aide of me when we were in school together and sat on the old slab benches placed around the fireside in the schoolhouse." Ed Leightsey backed away just in time to prevent a board off a packing case, held in the uplifted his of his beligerent appearing Minnie, from falling on his head. At a safe distance, he stood and stared at Minnie for a few moment, while he rolled a cigar between his thick lips like a bulldog gnawing on a meaty bone.
The demonstration of good-humored badinage over, Mrs. Leightsey joined Ed, or "He" as she referred to him, in telling the story. And both tongues chimed competitively in detailing the incidents - the ups and downs, gains and losses - of the decade between 1898 and 1908, when they were struggling to make secure the happiness they now enjoy. It was revealed, however, that Minnie cooked and washed and nursed Ed and the children while he pulled the bell-cord over his mule; that they worked and saved; and that, through crop rotations with the use of lime, legumes, and home-made fertilizers, they developed their land to a high state of cultivation.
A number of shoppers having called at Windmill Orchard stand to inspect some flowers, Mrs. Leightsey left Ed to continue the story: "Yes, Minnie was a real battle-axe in the struggle during those years, and she never complained. Without her help, I couldn't have made the grade. Just as fast as we could produce flowers, fruits, vegetables, eggs, chickens, and other things sufficient to pay the cost, ten dollars per acre, of one twenty-acre tract of my daddy's farm, we obligated ourselves to buy an adjoining twenty acres of the old farm. I found, all the while, a ready market for our produce among the people living in the city across the Congaree, six miles away.
"Yes, Minnie and I worked hard during those years, and luck, on the whole, was with us. Our acres increased rapidly in length and fertility, as did our family, until we had eleven children. After ten years of hard work and penny- pinching, we managed to save $1,350 - the amount we paid my daddy for the 135 acres we now own. And during the entire time, I didn't buy a single bale of hay or bushel of com with which to feed man or beast.
"After we had finished paying for the farm, in 1908, Minnie and I agreed that the time had come for us to take our long delayed honeymoon vacation, the trip to Charleston she mentioned a while ago."
He took in a deep breath --------"But, maybe I'd better let her tell about that, for I believe she got more out of the trip than I did."
Mrs. Meightsey had just closed a sale, deposited the receipts in the till, and was again listening intently to Ed's narrative. Catching the cue, she began! "You see, it's like this, he has never wanted much said about that Charleston trip. Well, I finally persuaded him that he needed to get away from the farm for, a few days. So, during the winter of 1908, he agreed that we should go to Charleston, and to Charleston we went. Everything went lovely until we reached the city by the sea; then trouble, as well as fun, began for me. Neither of us had ever seen the ocean, and, of course, we were not familiar with boats and boating. When we looked out upon those rolling waves of water, I decided it would be nice for us to take a boat ride around the bay. I wanted to get a close view of Fort Sumter and other places in and around the harbor we had read so much about. But, when he learned of my desire, he bucked like a stubborn old mule, and said, 'Why, Minnie, the very idea! I have always felt there was just as much water in Congaree River as I would care to undertake to pull you out of in case of an accident to you in crossing. I just can't and won't risk your sweet life out there in that pond.' So we didn't go. Anyway, we enjoyed our trip to Charleston, and I believe it helped to get us out of the old rut."
"Yes, I'm sure the little vacation did us good," agreed Leightsey. "The old farm end home were now ours, paid for by the sweat of our brows. We felt that we needed a number of conveniences and a few luxuries. So, during the next few years, we made improvements on the home; built new barns for the livestock and poultry in accordance with plans furnished by the Clemson College Extension Division; and then we replaced the scrub and mixed breeds of cows, hogs, and chickens with purebreds. We also planted a new peach orchard, a grape vineyard, and a flower garden. Later, the pastures were newly fenced and sodded to adapted clovers and grasses and, of course, we bought an automobile." He then looked up at the big signboard above his head and added, "We then built a windmill with which to pump water into the home, and to the barns. Thus it was our place became known as Windmill Orchard.
"When the time comes for me to be at home to look after the planting, cultivating, harvesting, and packing of the crops, Minnie cones to Columbia and looks after the selling on the market. I have learned through long experience on this market to make my plantings throughout the year, as the season permit, and I generally have the right amount of produce to sell at the right time on this market. This curb system of selling home-raised produce fits into my scheme perfectly. It is a great improvement over the old street peddling system I once had to practice in Columbia.
"I sort(grade) every pound of my produce; then I put it up in even weight boxes or bags or baskets before offering it for sale. No, air, there are no little tatara at the bottom of the pack and big taters at the top of the pack. I fix them all as near alike in size, color, and quality as is possible for me to fix them. Too, I've been in this business long enough to know I've got to give the trade what the trade wants; not what I want the trade to takes. When I once sell a person, he stays sold. He comes back again for mare. Yes, sir, that's what it takes to make 'em keep on comin' to our stand, And we sell from this our stand around $300.000 worth of cur produce each month. We also make sales elsewhere.
"I'll be very glad to have you drive out to Windmill Orchard, the farm. Minnie and I a loop there at night, and I'm there part of the time during the day. come when suits you, but I can come nearer being found at home during the planting season in the spring. The place is located on a country road, six miles west of the Congaree River bridge that separates the city of Columbia from the toan of West Columbia."
Windmill Orchard is, in truth, a well kept farm. Some of the land is on the streams, where there is the choicest of grazing for cattle, sheep, and hogs; other portions of the farm contain forests of tall, straight, long leaf pine; and others again are the wall-cultivated fields, orchards, and vineyards In close proximity to the modem livestock and poultry barns is an old well-preserved two-story residence. There, too, a windmill slowly turna at its task of raising and lowering the long pump shaft over the well. It keeps a fresh supply of water for the birds and the beasts around the barnyard; for use in the home; and, figuratively speaking, it keeps the name - Windmill Orchard - on the board in the market place.
Ed Leightsey, progressive in his farm management methods and of a practical turn of mind, has no particular interest in legislation or politica. "Farm legislation can have but little moaning to me and the old woman, for we've always lived end boarded at the same place," he boasted.
By that, he means they produce their fruits and vegetables, bacon end grits, milk and honey, end, in short, their entire living at Windmill Orchard. "And I've crossed and recrossed Congaree River with loads of produce to help feed the people of Columbia for forty-one years. And you bet I've fed 'eat good."
The market inspector and many others, who have long known the old Dutchman, refer to him as "Old Ed Leightsey." The market inspector said! "Long before the newsboys begin their chant, 'Morning State,' on the streets of the city, you can see old Ed Leightsey drive up Gervais Street with his flivver loaded to its gunwales with potatoes, turnips, peaches, grapes, melons, chickens, eggs, and other things in season - all ready for sale when the market opens at an early corning hour. He never lets the grass grow under his feet. He never walks to his work; he runs."
While old Ed Leightsey says that you can bet on his having helped to feed the people of Columbia, you can bet your bottom dollar, with safety, that he has fed those eleven children of his at the fountainhead. Judging from the hale and hearty appearance of them, they must have been "buttermilk fed chickens."
Yes, old Ed Leightsey claims that he and Minnie have reared eleven children - six sons and five daughters - at Windmill Orchard, and that each has been given a high school education. "And they are all married and gone now," he said with a sigh. "Ire is a building contractor; Vernon, a lumber dealer; John runs a garage; Arney is a textile worker; and Charles is a farmer. The girls are now Mosdames Stuckey, Williamson, Jeffcoat, Senn, and Sharp. And according to the last count, we have thirty-one grandchildren."
Even though the songs and cries of the Leightsey children are heard no longer around the old home, Ed and Minnie play, as well as work. "It is fun for us to come to the market every day and watch the cars and the people go by," is the way she put it. And they continue to cross and re-cross Congaree River each day, except Sunday, on their way to and from their produce stand on the big curb Market under the new steel shed. Under the sign - Windmill Orchard - they carry on, side by aide, as was their wont in their childhood days at the old backwoods school.
Approximately 5,000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: ALWAYS AGIN IT
Date of First Writing	January 24, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	J. Thomas Metz
Fictitious Name	Oscar Staub
Street Address	None
Place	Chapin, South Carolina
Occupation	Cotton Grower
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Name of Reviser	State Office
"At the sound of the tone signal it will be exactly eight o'clock, Eastern Standard Time," the radio announcer's voice boomed that bright October morning. words came clear and sharp to all stood and listened on the quiet street corner near the Columbia Chamber of Commerce building. The announcement stirred Oscar Staub, a short, be-whiskered, tobacco-chewing farmer from Dutch Fork, into action.
Just as the mellow notes of the radio signal faded away, Staub pounded his heavy walking cane eight times against the concrete pavement, and in a very harsh tone he complained to a little careworn, gingham-clad woman: "Jane, it's now eight o'clock and that farm de-monstrstor ain't showed up yet. I wish these Gov'ment agents 'ud learn to practice what they preach and cooperate sometimes with a hard workin' farmer like me who's cooperatin' in all these 'justment schemes. They say them 'justment checks have come, and I want mine, too."
With the voice of one possessing great patience and long suppressed emotion, Jane calmly answered: "Well, Oscar, you know I told you before we left home this morning that there was no need in our coming here so soon. I could have washed the dishes end churned the milk before leaving. And you could have - oh, well, I never could persuade you to do anything but work in the cotton field. You've always been in a hurry to do nothing." She turned then end pointed to the lines painted in gilt letters on the plate glass in front of her:
COUNTY AGRICULTURAL AGENT
Office Hours 8:30 to 1:00 and 2:00 to 5:00
And then she added, "It's not time for the farm agent to be in his office."
"I repeat, Jane, there's no justice in allowin' these Gov'ment agents to hold up a good hard workin' farmer like me who's tryin' to cooperate. I won't sign another dern crop 'justment agreement: for I tell you, Jane, I'm agin it." "Ginit" Staub emphasized his complaint this time with one pound of the heavy stick against the sidewalk. He then placed two rusty fingers against his tobacco stained lips and lot fly a stream of embeer that knocked a cockroach from its perch on the rim of a garbage can sitting some yards away.
"Good morning, Mr. Staub! I hope you are feeling fine and fit this morning," spoke the polite county agent At the entrance to the building.
"How yuh," grunted staub. "I've come for my check."
"Sorry, Mr. staub, but yours hasn't eons in yet," answered the county agent, as he walked into the building and to his office.
"Well, I'll be "Bam!" came a hollow sound that drowned out the last word, as a piece off "Ginit's" cedar stick ricocheted off the garbage can and out into the street.
"Stop it, Oscar," Jane barked. "You'll say and do too much t'reckley!"
"Afraid I talk too much, eh?"
"You did just then, Oscar staub!"
"Oh, Yes?"
"Now, Oscar Staub, you're going to listen to me for one time in your life," Jane snapped, as she pushed back her much worn hat with a jerk. The of red hair on her head and the belligerent look on her face lent color to the truth and scorn her tongue poured out on Oscar's defenseless head: "You - you've done nothing all these years we've been carried but talk and grumble! You - you'd never be sensible like a real farmer and go to hear Doctor Knapp and ether far: loaders tell, free of charge, of a way to run your farm! If - if you'd done that, may be you wouldn't now need to ask the Government to give you something for doing absolutely nothing!" Then she adjusted her hat and walked away.
Staub, the "gin it" Of Dutch Fort, looked dazed and defeated. He staggered out into the street, reached down end picked up the broken bite of his walking cane, and returned to the sidewalk. He stood for a moment staring blankly down at the filthy garbage can into which he had, a few moments before, sent a cockroach scurrying to cover. as he turned to leave, he was heard to mumble, "I have made a Mess of life. I -- but Jana wee right." Then, he, too, walked quietly away.
Perhaps there is no one better acquainted with the Staub family than Mose Austin, an old Megro who claims to have spent his entire life on the Staub farm. Mose stated some months ago: "Mister Oscar was bawn on Friday, January 13, 1875, right hare on dis ole fawm. A number of ginerations of he folks live here befo' he time. Ole Marse Isaac, he daddy, sont him to de schools dey had roun' here when Mister Osear was a boy. Den he sont him to Leesville for a year or mo' to tend de 'cadeny. But Mister Oscar didn' lak school, and he didn' lak de fawm. And when de war in cuby cornea along, he ups and jines de Army, and den he gone a long time."
According to Mose Austin and others in Dutch fork who knew Hr. Staub very well, he reamined with the Any in Cuba until the treaty of peace with the Spanish Government was concluded in February, 1899. He was then transferred with his military outfit to the Philippine Islands, where, for a number of years, he served under General red funston in quelling the Moro insurgent uprisings in the wilds and jungles of that newly acquired territory. He contracted a tropical fever in the millppines; was kept in a Government hospital at Manila until his recovery; and then, in the year 1904, he was sent back to the states and given an honorable discharge with the rank of sergeant.
What Sergeant Staub did during the four years he remained in California, or in the West, has never been explained. Ha, however, did meet and marry Jane Mueller in san Francisco during that time.
"At the beginning of 1909," explained a Dutch Fork farmer and merchant who knew the staub family, "Ginit end Mrs. Staub took up their residence at his old home. His father had died the year before, and his mother had been dead for a number of years. He was the lone heir to the ninety-six-acre farm and the two-story, eight-room residence thereon. At that time, the Staub farm was one of the best in the county.
"Yes," he continued, "when Ginit took charge of the ninety-six acres and the old home, he had all that was required to give a three-horse farmer a feeling of security and Independence. He was only thirty-four years old and in very good health. He had an industrious, intelligent, end ambitious little wife. He had a highly productive, well terranced, and sufficiently, equipped farm. Be had a comfortable home of eight large rooms, equipped with substantial old furniture. He had the best Negro help to be found in the community. And he had money with which to conduct his farming operations and to spare for luxuries. The oak and cedar shade trees; the shrubbery, grass, and flowers; the board fences; and the orchards and vineyards were ell there just as his father had left them. He was independent, indeed. And he demonstrated his independence during the years he lived and tried to farm in Dutch Fork."
While the immediate community surrounding the old staub home is known as white Rock, yet, much of the land is red, particularly Mr. Staub's. The soil type on his farm is known to the soil technologist as Georgeville clay. It is of a slate rock formation, gummy and sticky in wet weather and very hard in dry weather. And it is highly adapted to the growth of cotton and many other crops, when under proper care and culture. It is a soil type that erodes rapidly when under constant cultivation, unless the field terraces are properly cared for.
"And one of the first things that Oscar staub did when he started to farming was to plow down the terranes in his fields. He said he was agin the use of such things on his place," said the talkative Dutch Fork grocer with the sign - BROWN MULE! TOBACCO - over the door to his store building. "I knew he had been a contrary sort of follow when he was a boy, but I thought he'd overcome the habit in the Army.
"But in spite of the fact that Ginit, as we all called Oscar, had traveled in a number of foreign lands and had come in contact with many people of different nationalities during the eleven years from homo, he took up his old habit of keeping himself aloof from the most of his acquaintances and neighbors. I saw little of him, but I heard from him through Moss and Jake Austin, his Negro sharecroppers, who came often to my store for chewing tobacco for them- salves and for Oscar.
"Ginit interested himself mostly with cotton growing and cotton markets. During the fall and winter months, Mose and Jake Austin would start out early in the morning to Columbia, with wagons piled high with snowy white cotton, with good, bad, and indifferent grades of bagging packed around it. But late in the afternoon, Mose and Jake would return, riding high on bales of hay and bags of corn. Ginit did plant a little corn some years, but harvested only a few nubbins. Cotton, and Mrs. cotton, was his bread wagon." He chuckled a moment, and inquired!
"Did you know that the story of "the Yellow Com and a Fool,' that had gone the rounds for a number of years, came out of Butch Fork and that Oscar Staub is one of the real characters in that story? Well, it did. It got its beginning through an experience of a political-minded person from one of our adjoining counties, while he was out beating the bushes for votes in his race for election to office in that county. Not knowing that he had driven across the county line, the anxious candidate came across a farmer sweating and grumbling and hosing in a patch of yellow stunted corn just beyond an old rail fence by the roadside. The following conversation took place.
"Good morning, Sir! memo is Smith,' spoke the polite and anxious candidate.
"'Howdy!' grunted Ginit Staub.
"'Yo-yo-your corn looks kinder yellow,' remarked the candidate.
"'I planted yellow corn,' Ginit's tobacco filled mouth sputtered, as he went on hoeing among the little stunted cornstalks almost hidden away in the tender green crab grass.
'The polite candidate, in his amazement at the rebuff, squinted at Ginit for a moment, and then said, 'say, Mister, there's not much between you and a fool, is there?'
"Only a fence,' was Ginit's answer.
"And Oscar, Mose, and Jake continued to grow cotton, and to buy more and more corn, hey, end chewing tobacco each year. It was mainly through Mose or Jake that the neighbors learned anything concering activity on the Staub farm. They seldom saw Ginit, but Mose end Jake came often to my store to gossip and to wisecrack with the checker players, whittlers, commity politicians, and others who loafed around my place. 'How's the boss today. Moss - Jake?' they'd inquire. And after the craving for Brown Mule had been satisfied, the two Negroes would tell of the latest happenings on the Staub farm.
"Oscar had taken no part in commity activities or politics. For a number of years, however, there had been rumblings of discontent on the part of a few Dutch Fork citizens concerning community improvements. They felt the county officials had neglected the community, then a part of Lexington County, in the way of road improvement and so forth. Wall, we had a long rainy spell during the fall and early winter of 1911, and the roads became quagmires. So the political storm broke on all sides; and Oscar Staub, 'gin it like, sallied forth as one of the greatest rebels in the community. He was highly in favor of seceding from Lexington County, and became wary active in the movement which eventually made Dutch Fork, on February 9, 1912, a part of Richland County by legislative agreement.
"It was along about this same time that we began to hear reports of the rapid Invasion of the boll weevil in the western section of the cotton belt. Frank Laver, one of our Dutch Fork farmers, was in Congress. He'd been studying about the weevil situation, and, politician like, he wanted to do something for the farmers. So he got in with Senator Hoke Smith of Georgia, and they got through a law called the Smith-Lever Act, la 1914. Then the Government sent out Dr. S. A. Knapp and other speakers to tell the cotton farmers of the danger. But nobody but Mose and Jake Austin from the Staub farm would go to hear Dr. Knapp. Oscar, being agin it all, stayed at home and worked in his cotton fields. His fields, at the same time, had begun to show signs of sheet erosion.
"During the summer of that same year, 1914, the war in Europe broke out, and there was no market for cotton the following fall and winter, except the buy-a-bale movement. Oscar, at the time, had a big supply of the fleecy staple on hand. He had all of the new crop and some that was carried over from former years. 'White folks, de burns and de woods am full of cotton, and Mister Oscar is chawin' mo' 'bacco den he ever is chawed befo'; and us ain't got a thing to buy braid wid, let 'lone 'bacco, and us can't eat cotton,' is the way old Mose Austin reported the situation on the Staub farm at my store around Christmas time of that year.
"By the spring of 1915, the panic in the business world began to abate, and the markets started to function again. The price for cotton and other farm product a, however, was very low. Ginit, partly through his need for funds, but Mostly through his way of acting contrary to the advice of his wife and everybody else, sold out his big supply of cotton at a loss. He and Mose and Jake, however, continued to plant cotton.
"The years passed. The World War came and went. Despite the pleadings of the Nation - FOOD WILL TIN THE WAR!' - they planted cotton, and cotton alone, on the Staub farm.. The crop yield, however, grew less and less with each succeeding year. It was not because they planted less acreage in cotton, but it was due to an exhaustion of the fertility of the soil. The fine gray fields of Alamance silt loam, which a few years before had shown signs of sheet erosion, had now turned to red clay and were streaked with washes. In a few fields there were gullies which compelled the plowman to turn back when they cultivated the cotton. The buildings on the place had begun to leak; the door and window shutters had begun to fall from their hinges; the board fences hung from their moorings; and the orchards were diseased. Mrs. Staub saw to it that the lawns, flowers, and shrubbery were kept in good condition.
"It was just after the World War had ceased that Ginit Staub made the biggest mistake of his life as a cotton grower. He had produced, at great expense, quite a large supply of cotton; had held it in storage at a high cost; and had borrowed money heavily, at a high rate of interest, with which to grow more cotton. When the price for cotton reached twenty-five cents a pound, he wanted thirty; and After the price of thirty was to be had, he decided that he wanted forty; end when the cotton market finally reached its height - fortynine cents a pound - in the summer of 1920, he ordered his broker to sell out at fifty. One year later, June, 1921, he was sold out on the cotton market at ten cents. He couldn't put up the margin necessary for the protection of his idol - cotton."
Before the talkative Dutch Fork grocer could proceed further with his history of Ginit Staub, Hose and Jake Austin walked into his store.
"Mose, you black rascal," he said, "you are the very fellow I want to see right now. I want you and Jake to tell me what's been going on over at your place. I haven't heard from you in some time."
"Us need some 'bacco fus' thing, Mister Smith," answered Mose, after a haw-haw.
When Mose had pinched off a big hunk of Brown Mule and placed it in his mouth, he said, "Mister Osoar, he 'bout lak as usual, 'cept he wor'ed 'bout not bein' able to git all de gewano he want to use dis year." He began to study for a moment to refresh his memory about guano and guano hauling. Then he continued: "Jake, does you 'member de time when us had all dat cotton and cottonseeds to haul to Columby, and all dat cawn, hay, end gewano to fotch back, and it had rain' so much dat winter and spring dat de roads wan't nothin' but mad up to de axle of de waggin?"
"I sho' does, Mose," answered Jake, after he had supplied his hungry mouth with a chew of tobacco. "And wan't de boss outdone and mad?" he added after a loud haw-haw.
"Kack, kack, kack," Mose laughed as he added another pinch of Brown Mule to the quid in his mouth, end then he continued the discussion: "Yas, suh, he sho' was mad. He'd cuss de road thor'ties for everything he could think of, and swear he ain't go pay no mo' tax in Lexington County, 'cept he be place under de compeldation of de law. Dat was way back yonder 'bout 1911, befo' de war.
"Speakin' of de war time," he went on, "After de war gits over and de sojers come home, hit look lak ever'thing go wrong on de place. Mister Oscar, he had belt and belt all our cotton till de price go down to nuttin' in 1921, and then he sell. Half de time, dat year, all on de place went hongry. So I say one day to Jake, 'Jake, die ain't gwine do; us'll have to plant some peas lak dat wan from 'way out yonder - Doctor Kinhap, I believe dat he name - egvised de farmers to do. Miss Jane, she say she want us to plant peas. But Mister Oscar say, 'un-uh', he don't want nothin' but cotton planted on de place; dat he in debt and hafter raise cotton to git de money to pay wid. So when dat win' begin to blow all dew thunder clouds out de wes', 'long 'bout July, I tole Jake hit a bad sign. Sho' nuff dar did cows trouble, 'long 'bout Angus' and September. De boll weevil come des lak dat doctor wan from 'way out yonder say he'd come." After Mose had unloaded an accumulation of ambeer from his big black mouth, he opened wide the same, clapped his horny hands, let go a long guffaw, and then finished his narrative! "And, bless yo' life, dat bug sho' romped on things dat fall."
"Romped on things is correct, Mose," agreed the grocer. "So great was the destruction that heavy losses ware sustained by business men as well as by farmers in this part of the country. Many suffered bankruptcy, and a financial panic among the local crop-lending agencies was the result. Banks required mortgages on real estate in placing further loans among farmers. This ruling caused a big cut in the acreage planted in cotton in 1922, and the years that followed. But I don't believe Mose end Jake end their boss did much toward cutting cotton acreage." He then looked at Mose and awaited his answer.
"Mi-Mi-Miss Jane, she tried to git him to plant sumpin' in place of cotton, but he say, 'un - uh,' des lak dat time she went him to plant peas. And one day he went down to Columby and gived a mortgage on de place and bought mo' gewano dan ebber befo'. When me and Jake was haulin' hit home, I say to Jake one day, 'Jake, dis gewane don't smell lak hit grow cotton on dat lan' up home.' Anyway, Mister Oscar had us haul it out and put hit down in de fields and plant cotton on hit. De cotton come up and started to growin', and, suh, befo' de middle of May I looks down one day and sees de boll weevil settin' up dere in de top of den little cotton stalks waitin' for de squares to fo'm. So all dat gewano us hauled and put down in 1922 made nuttin' but a crop of boll weevils. And de very same thing happen agin de nex' year.' Mose walked to the door, spat, end announced, "Well, white folks, I reckon as and Jake will hadder be gittin' 'long back to dat ole red field over yonder and try to git some of dem gullies filled up so us can plow cross 'em," and they departed.
"Old Mose Austin has a splendid memory," the grocer remarked, "and I am sure he has stated the facts. Ginit Staub accepts no one's advice in regard to his method of farming - not even in the face of danger. After the great damage done by the boll weevil in 1921, the Columbia bankers, merchants, and other business men acting as a unit - the Chamber of Commerce - became interested in securing expert advice for the farmers of the county under the Smith-Lever Act of 1914. Money, office space, and equipment were provided in order to get the best talent possible for weevil control, soil conservation, and farm management in general.
"In 1922, Needham Winters - a shrewd, quick-witted, rangy fellow from Taxas A. and M. College - was appointed farm damonstration agent for Richland County. He came to my place one day soon after his appointment and suggested a plan for the organization of a sort of forum club for the farmers in the community. I favored the idea, and, after Winters and I had discussed the plan with a few of the leading farmers, it later rasulted in our getting a good active farm organization. We named it The Dutch Fork Farm Improvement Association. One of our main objects was to get hold of farmers, like Ginit Staub, in the community and put them to practicing, if possible, some of Dr. S. A. Knapp's philosophy.
"County Agent Winters, at my suggestion, took a whole day off from his many official duties and want to see Staub on his farm. Despite the rebuffs from Ginit, the audacious Texan 'stuck to his guns' and spent the day following up the soil-robbing cotton plantar over his place. winters met Ginit's rebuffs with the suggestions! 'Old man, you need some terraces in this field; plant some cowpeas; this fence needs mending; prune and spray those fruit trees; you've got to dust this cotton with calcium arsenate, if you expect to produce cotton. It was, however, only after winters had made Ginit the promise that he would be made a director in The Dutch Fork Farm Improvement Association that he'd agree to join and attend the meetings.
"For the regular monthly meeting of our farm organisation, on July 1, 1922, County Agent Winters had a number of speakers from Clemson College and elsewhere for the meeting. He had evidently forgotten about Staub and the promise. Well, the house was full and the meeting was under way that night, when, quite unexpectedly to everybody present, in stalked 'Director' Staub, muddy shoes, walking stick, and all. He didn't atop walking until he had found a east near the speaker's stand. Winters' face beamed with the pride of a hunter who'd killed a bear. Dr. Vernon of the Tri-State Tobacco Grower's Cooperative Association had just begun to outline a plan for a cooperative market in Columbia - a curb market - when Staub came. The crowd began to giggle. After a while, it began to appear there would be a general outburst of laughter and disorder in the room. Winters, sensing the situation, whispered something in Dr. Vernon's ear. The little doctor smiled, nodded, and then sat down.
"'Bam, bam, bam!' The pocket knife in Winters' hand sounded on the teacher's desk in the room, and then Winters announced! 'The meeting will please come to order! Before Dr. Vernon resumes his discussion, we will hear from one of the officers of our club - Director Staub!'
"Well, sir, without preliminary ado, old Ginit ambled across the room to a broken windowpane and squirted, with the accuracy of a marksman firing on a bull's-eye, a stream of ambeer through it. He then unloaded his advice into the anxious ears of his listeners:
"'There's been too much advice 'round here of late 'bout how to farm, and not 'nough hones'-to-goodness work in the fields. Hal Raleigh, the hoss doctor, was over at my place the other day and tol' me that the farm de-mon-strator was doin' nothin' but goin' 'round over the county and a-makin' fun of ay ole pore lan'. And he says to me, "Oscar, if I was in your place I'd go down to one of them dern meetin's they're havin' down at the schoolhouse and lay in a complaint agin that fellah Winters." And old Dock writ out me a petition to present to yuh. So, as a member and officer of this club, my fellah farmers, I've come to ask yuh to sign this petition.' He then took from his pocket a folded paper - the petition - addressed to The Honorable Board of County Commissioners, asking that the services of County Agent Winters be discontinued, on the complaint that the said Winters had meddled into the business of the farmers of Richland County.
"While Ginit didn't succeed in ousting Winters as county agent, he did succeed in becoming quite well known, after that meeting, for the interest he took in the political issues of the time and for his discrimination in his choice of a candidate for public office. It was his habit, or affliction, to be more often interested in the defeat of some public official than in the election of any one in particular. He opposed all local movements looking toward community improvements. He just had to be in opposition to his neighbors - always agin it.
"Well, it so happened," the grocer continued, "that the years 1923-1930 were favorable in varying degrees for the cotton growers. The market for cotton went up with markets for other commodities, and for stocks and bonds, during that period. They managed somehow to grow cotton on the Staub farm, and Ginit would hold it for a better price. He was never able, however, to sell on the peaks in the market. It was his luck to unload at the bottom pretty nearly every time he cold. At any rate, the last big sale of cotton made by him was in the summer of 1931, at six cents a pound. Ginit then, to use one of old Mose Austin's phrases, 'went broke as a convict.'"
Through the help of the Veterans' Bureau, the Seed Loan, and other New Deal agencies, Mr. Staub was enabled to live and to farm on for a few more years at the old Staub place, as the Dutch Forkers were now referring to the soil impoverished farm. He unwillingly - agin-it-like to the end - became, as he thought, a cooperator with the county agricultural agent in the program of the Agricultural Adjustment Administration. When 1935 came, however, it was found that Mr. Staub had not complied with the terms of the Bankhead Amendment to the AAA Act. So there could be no check for him. And thus it was that, on that October morning, he was compelled to stand by the garbage can - the one from which he so expertly sprayed the cockroach and had struck with his walking cane - and admit that Jane was right; that he'd made a mess of life.
Two weeks after Mr. Staub's demonstration in front of the county agent's office, the little gingham-dressed woman he had called Jane decided that she had seen enough of boll weevils, cotton fields, gullies, and failure. She, therefore, bundled her few belongings and boarded a Southern Railway train and was carried back to live again among cooperators in her native California. Even though Mr. Staub was now the recipient of a substantial veteran's pension, he could no longer be independent. He followed Jane. Soon after Mr. and Mrs. Staub left for California, the old Staub farm fall into the possession of a large holding company. The writer had an occasion to visit the place some months ago. And what a spectacle! The dilapidated residence was there, together with a few tumble-down buildings once used for barns. The board fences were no longer in evidence; and where there was once a well-kept orchard, only a few diseased and dead trees remained. Along the former fence rows, and in the weeds and briar-grown fertile spots in low places, there was growing an abundance of escaped peach seedlings, planted there by the eroding soil. The red fields and gullies were veritable sore eyes on the landscape. The only human inhabitants found on the abandoned farm were a gray-haired Negro, of unmixed blood, and his wife. They lived in the Staub home, and he claimed to be employed as a sort of caretaker for the place. He was Moss Austin. Despite the sixty-five years he claimed for his age, he was still alert in mind and body, and still used Brown Mule - his favorite brand of chewing tobacco. He was in a reminiscent mood when found sitting on the rickety porch facing the east. As he gazed across the red fields and gullies in the direction of Congaree River, he had much to tell in connection with his life on the Staub farm.
"No, suh," he began, "dis place ain't what hit used to be when Marster Issac, who wus Mister Oacar's father, lef' hit nigh on to thirty year ago. Hit was at dat time cawnsidered de finest place in de Dush Fo'k. But now when I sets here and looks 'cross at dese here gullies, weeds, and briars, and to dat muddy water in de ribber, I says to myse'f, 'Mose, dat muddy water am de blood of die lan'.'"
While Mose Austin had much to tell concerning the Staub farm, he spoke with a feeling when he mentioned the failure wade by the late owner. It was with profound regret that he saw the place pass out of the hands of a family he had known for so many years. "I sho' hated to see Miss Jane and Mister Oacar give up de place and go to de Wes' ", is the way he put it. The faithful Negro had spent his life on the place. He loved it and all the memories connected with it. He realized, however, that its present condition was due to the handiwork of a veteran soil robber, who was always agin it.
Approximately 2,700 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: FIGHTING BEN
March 3, 1939
Date of First Writing	March 3, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	B. R. Thomas (white)
Fictitious Name		Ben Thorp
Camp Fornance
Street Address	
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Furniture Salesman
Name of Writer	John L. Dove
Name of Reviser	State Office
Standing at the bedside of his dying father, Ben Thorp said: "Don't worry, Dad, I'll fight the battle for Mom and Sister. I'll see that they never have to suffer for anything." A few moments later it was left to the fourteen year old lad to make good his promise; for Benjamin Thorp, his father, was no more.
When the responsibilities of a breadwinner fell upon the shoulders of Ben Thorp, he was residing on a 135-acre farm located on Turkey Creek, ten miles northwest of the town of Edgefield, South Carolina. The old Thorp home is still there, but the old red fields and gullies bear evidence of the fact that much of its former fertility has gone into the muddy waters of Turkey Creek. Too, the cardboard signs, nailed to a tree here and there end bearing the words - "POSTED, keep off" - plainly tell us that the place has been given to the use of game and wildlife.
According to Ben Thorp, there was nothing out of the ordinary about his boyhood life on Turkey Creek. Before his father died in February, 1892, he attended the old field school a few months each year, and, of course, went fishing occasionally in Turkay Creak with the Negro boys on the place. "I played and fought with the little niggers, ate com bread, drank buttermilk, and grew," is the way Ben described his young life.
His education is, indeed, very limited. His writing is very poor, and he makes use of slang words and Negro dialect very freely in expressing himself. It is all, no doubt, due to a lack of school advantages and to the constant association with illiterates. In speaking of his schooling, he casually remarked! "Oh, I began in the first grade and finished in the first grade. I just grew up and spread out, by main strength and awkwardness."
When Mr. Thorp was asked a short time ago to tell of his early interests in life, he responded with a alight stammer: "Fi-fi-fight, fr-fr-frolie, and fee-feesh." He was "quick on the trigger," he said. He meant that he often resorted to the use of his fiat, rather than arbitration, in the settlement of an argument. He says that he is a typical "eon of old Edgefield He was named in honor of one of Edgefield's moat noted sons, "Pitchfork" Ben Tillman.
While Ben Thorp had no political or military ambitions, he, like his namesake, was true to his convictions. When he felt called upon, he did not hesitate to use his fist in the interest of a friend in a hot race for public office. His first political battle was in 1899, the year he cast his first ballot. He aided Ben Tillman end Ben Cogburn. The latter was for many years Clerk of Court in Edgefield County, and was a distant realtive of Ben's.
Yes, Ben Thorp has been a fighter and a true son of Edgefield. He says he is proud of the fact, too. He inherited this trait of character. His ancestors were fighters before him. His father was a Confederate veteran, an original member of the K.K.K., and rode as a "Red Shirt" with Mart Gary, M. C. Butler, and Ben Tillnan during the stirring days of reconstruction in 1876. His grandfather followed Colonel P. M. Butler in the Mexican War, and his great-grandfather was with General Pickens in the war of the American Revolution. Ben admits being a follower on the Toney faction in the Toney-Booth feud Which plagued society and politics for a number of years in Edgefield.
Ben, true to his promise made his dying father, remained with his widowed mother and his sister. Without one word of complaint, he assumed the duties of a family keeper and farm manager. He worked hard and was very considerate of his mother and sister. "I plowed row for row with the other niggers on the place from the time I was fourteen until I quit farming years later." He made big crops of cotton, com, and other crops on the three-horse farm he operated. His main crop was cotton, and his experience with this was as follows!
"I was like the average Edgefield farmer - a cotton farmer. Pretty near everybody would look forward to lay-by time during July and August. Then we'd have the usual round of preaching, picnics, politics, and pitch battles all over old Edgefield," And then Ben added: "Th-th-them was courtin' days, too." He told of other bygones.
"No, I've never made money on the farm. I made a good living, though, and had lots of fun. I can now look back and see the mistakes I made as a farmer. I depended too much on cotton, and failed to plan for the future. It was a habit of the farmers then to think in terms of cotton bales, and I had the disease. If I had thought more about agriculture and less about cotton and lay-by time, before I was married, it may be that I wouldn't now be afraid of the 'bill toters' on my heel."
Ben Thorp caught his breath, hesitated, and reached for his smoking material. It was not till he had licked his cigarette into shape and was feeling in his pocket for a match that he spoke again.
"Mary Bunch and I had been playing around together for a long time.
In fact, we had gone to school together and joined the church - Gilgal Baptist - together before we were grown. It was during big meeting time at our church in June, 1900. We decided one day at the church that we had fr-frolicked long enough; that we should get married and settle down. My mother had died a few months before, and my sister had married. So I really needed a companion at home. Mary made me promise to quit f-fighting and raising so much sand over politics. I promised her I would do that. Under the circumstances, I reckon I'd have promised to sprout wings if she had asked me. Anyway, I broke my promise the next day. A fellow tried to scare my horse while I was on my way to Edgefield. I jumped on him at the courthouse and was giving him the one-two when a friend stopped me."
Mary Bunch forgave Ben for violating the agreement and permitted their marriage to take place on the date selected. His embarrassments, however, were not over. Major, his driving horse, had more trouble laid up for him. It had rained, and the red clay roads around Gilgal Church were very muddy. Major had never liked to pull in and, according to Ben. He balked as Ben and Mary neared Gilgal, the place of their marriage. No amount of persuasion could induce him to pull the little buggy, with umbrella top, on to the church. Ben explained. "I unhitched Major and told him, 'D-d-dern you, stand there. I shall be obeyed, and I w-will git married.' He left Major and the buggy standing there in the road and walked on to the church and were married."
Mr. and Mrs. Bon Thorp began their married life at the old Thorp home. The people who lived around Gilgal were prosperous and happy then. There was no special scarcity of money. Man, woman, and children, for the most part, were gay, light-hearted, and hospitable. So Ben's and Mary's kith, kin, and neighbors entertained and showered them with wedding gifts and wished them well. And all was well for Ben and Mary during the next few years. He produced big crops of cotton and received a good price for the same. His narrative in this connection runs as follows:
"I made an unusually large crop of cotton the year I was married, end that fall the price was so good I got rich. And the next year, 1821, was favorable, and I got still richer. When 1922 came, I felt I was sitting on top of tho world. I had money in the bank. I rode around in a new automobile. I had bought new furniture for the home, and I had spent money freely for farm tools, and so forth. Yes, air, I sort of felt I'd gotten to be a 'constipated gentleman.' If one had told me then I'd be as poor as I am now, I wouldn't have believed it."
Ben Thorp had reached the peak of his prosperity and pleasure in 1921. The next year, he made the mistake of trying to grow richer off his art of cotton growing. He purchased high-priced fertilisers in abundance and bought many other things at a high cost. He staked his all on cotton in the spring of 1922. The boll weevil invaded his farm that summer and fall, and he lost heavily. He was compelled to mortgage his 135 acres at the beginning of 1923, in order to secure money with which to purchase farm and home supplies. His luck the next year, and the next, was no better. He explained his "picklement" in the following language!
"I had to buy and buy so much during 1923 that I spent every dollar I could get my hands on. All during the year, the niggers on the place continued to ask for meat, meal, flour, sugar, coffee, hats, coats, pants, dresses, sox, stockings, shirts, shoes, snuff, soap, tobacco, and then some. The more it rained, the more the grass grew, end the more the weevil came. But it made no difference with the dern niggers and their wants. When Christmas, 1923, came, I had nothing left that I could call my own, except Mary, my three girl babies, and my 1921 model Ford. There was nothing for me to do but put cut the fire, call the dog, and call it quits."
In January, 1924, Ben Thorp became an ex-farmer. He surrendered the old ancestral farm and home to his creditors. Ho@@ then packed his wife, his babies, and his dog in his flivver and brought then to Columbia to live, if the living could be found.
He did find a way of making a living in Columbia, and the faithful old flivver helped him. He went to work immediately as a collector for the Palm Furniture Company, at a salary of fifteen dollars a week and a small commission. He used his automobile in making his daily and weekly rounds over the city streets and alleyways. The following is his account of his first experience as an installment collector:
"I, of course, was as green as crab grass in the furniture business, end as a collector in a city. The boss gave me a bunch of old accounts they had among the toughest customers in the city. I started out with these old billa on one Monday morning. I made one of my first calls in Glencoe Mill village. I left my car on Hager Street end walked down an alley in search of a certain house number. When I found the house, I knocked on the door.
" 'Who's that a-knockin'?' came a voice from within.
"Furniture man! I shouted.
"'What furnisher man yuh be?' came back the answer.
"'Palm Furniture Company.'
"'Ain't owin' yuh a dern thing.'
"'Wh-why, I have a bill here against you for a four-piece bedroom suite, some chairs, and a kitchen cabinet. You've only paid ten dollars on it. Let me come in, please, and I'll explain further.'
"The door opened, and out came a tall, skinny-faced, red-haired, snuff- dipping woman.
"'Done tole yuh once I ain't owin' yuh a dern thing.'
"' Have you receipts to prove your claim?' I asked.
"'Yes, jist like this: "kerdap,"' she spit at me.
"Well, sir, that old alley bat came within an inch of spitting that gob of snuff amber in my face. She made ma so mad I saw red. My old Edgefield fighting blood boiled to the point where I took it upon myself, while the old alley bat cussed me, to walk through that house and drag out, piece by piece, our furniture. When I took the goods to the store, the boss told me that he was raising my salary to eighteen dollars a week. He furthermore told me that, if I succeeded in collecting the money, or the goods, on a number of other certain accounts, I would be made a twenty-five dollar a week man.
When he was asked if he succeeded in getting the promotion, his answer was, "I di-didn't miss it." And Ben Thorp soon won the reputation of being one of the most successful and daring installment collectors in Columbia. Honest buyers respected and trusted him. But when the dishonest buyer saw Ben and his rattling flivver come their way, they knew instinctively that it meant one of two things - pay, or Ben gets the goods. His greatest weakness, or maybe it was his strength, as a collector, was that he often permitted the hard luck tales of the unfortunate to stand in the way of his progress.
Ben Thorp and his flivver traveled early and late, "beating the bushes" in search of a collection on an account, or else in search of a party who had moved away and was in arrears on an account. He worked eight years with the Palm Furniture Company. During his eight years experience as collector, he coined a number of expressions now in common use among installment collectors: "Alley bat," for an inhabitant of the alleys and back streets; "furnisher crook," for one of unethical practices in the furniture business; "constipated gentleman," for one living in splendor but slow in meeting his installment payments; "skilley vitch," for a woman who resorts to the use of charm and physical attractions in lieu of the contracted payments.
At the beginning of 1932, according to Mr. Thorp, the old flivver which he had obtained during the better days had become worn out. He then had to walk the rounds in making collections. This, he decided, was too much for one of his age. He, therefore, resigned his job with the Palm Furniture Company and immediately went to work as a floor salesman for a used furniture dealer in Columbia.
Ben and Mary Thorp have raised five children - Carrie, Elizabeth, Ruth, Louise, and Ben. They are all married. The girls are now Mesdames Fowler, Walker, Bankhead, and Pendleton. Ben lives in Virginia, and is successfully operating a cafeteria in that State. "I, of course, miss my children when I report to the boss at home each night, but I fight on in the furniture game," is the way he put it.
Yes, Ben Thorp has worked hard since that cold February day in 1892, when he made that promise to his dying father to become a dutiful son. He not only made good his promise to care for his dependent mother and sister, but he keeps on keeping on in caring for his family. Each day, Sunday excepted, he can be found, ever on the alert, at his job. He is now in charge of a branch store owned by a large used furniture dealer. The store is on the 1000 block of Gervais Street, Columbia. He works on a commission basis and admits that the business affords a good living for him and his wife.
Ben Thorp, they say, was a very handsome fellow in his younger days. He is not a bad looking man now at sixty-one years. He has a plentiful supply of iron-gray hair; his face is full; and his eyes are still clear and blue. His greatest handicap in the way of looks, perhaps, is his teeth. Just one tooth is left in the front part of his mouth. But this one apparently serves him well until his blue eyes see something of beauty. His thick tongue then begins to beat and hang on the old snag in such a way that his words come with a sort of skip, hop, and jump. He becomes afraid "th-th-the p-p-pretty th-th-thing" won't care to stop and talk to him. While his stocky body has lost much of its former pep and suppleness, his old friendly honest self is still there. He loves to talk, and he has many friends in Columbia. He also loves to handle old furniture, and he "fi-fi-fights" on.