Approximately 4,250 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: MARTHA JOINT, OCCASIONAL SERVANT.
Date of First Writing	March 3, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Maulsey Stoney (Negro)
Fictitious Name	Martha Joint
Place	Edisto Island, S. C.
Occupation	Occasional Servant.
Name of Writer	Chalmers S. Murray
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #-1655
Chalmers S. Murray
Edisto Island, S. C.
March 3, 1939
Life History
Approximately 4,250 Words.
MARTHA JOINT. OCCASIONAL SERVANT.
Martha Joint first opened her eyes on an Etiwan beach. That was 76 years ago. There is little left of the beach now. The ocean has been biting off big chunks of it since 1885. In a few years, perhaps, the last sand dune and the last palmetto may be gone. When Martha arrived, 50 dwelling houses, a church and a school building stood on the barrier island; cows and horses nibbled the long green grass, and live oaks cast shadows over pleasant walkways. The beach was a full blown summer resort for the Etiwan planters in those days.
Martha's mother, Molly was cooking for the Mortons who owned a large frame house near the back landing. She took a month off to attend to Martha's birth, then went back to her cook pots. The baby, a puny little thing with sharp brown eyes and light mahogany colored skin, was minded by relatives and a older sister named Susan.
It was easy to mind babies and children on the beach. You merely sat a child down intthe sand and let it amuse itself. There were Shells to play with and sand crabs to watch, and the roar of the surf drowned out yells. The babies would soon become tired of matching their voices against the sound of the surf and fall asleep. White and black mothers liked their children to play in the sand. If they tumbled over no bones were broken and the sand never soiled their clothing.
Martha had many playmates of both races, and her beach days must have been happy ones. The scent of roasting oysters was always in her nostrils. If the little blacks and whites got hungry it was a simple matter to gather oysters from the creek banks and to roast them over a drift wood fire. The boys played Indians, shooting cane arrows into the clear blue sky. The little girls ran screaming to the sand dunes, pretending they were very much frightened. It was glorious to race down the beach with the southwest wind behind your back, to Chase the sand crabs to their holes, to hunt bird eggs, to fish for whiting in the inlet. When work was to be done at home it was easy to get out of ear shot. The wind called much louder than mothers.
Martha remembers the hurricanes that pushed the breakers into front yards and ripped rooves from houses. Wind and rain came together, making awful sounds. The sky was full of dirty, flying clouds. The ocean was dark green off shore, capped with white combers; near the shore purplish-black. The sound of the wind and the surf and the rain terrified Martha. She would shut the bed room door and squat down in the corner, but still she would hear the sound. She would get into bed and bury her head in a pillow. The sound came through the pillow.
The storn of 1885 made the worse sound and did the most damage. When the surf was breaking under the Morton's house it was time to move. Martha, then a young woman of 22 helped move the furniture out of the house to the waiting wagons. The Mortons, their cook and their cook's daughters fled to safety, taking refuge in the Bailey cottage that stood on a high sand dune.
She has never eared for the beach and the ocean since. Once in a while she has been carried to the barrier island by her white employer to help mind the Children, but always she has kept her eyes turned away from the sea.
A few years after the hurricane Martha married burly Henry Joint. Henry was at least seven years younger than Martha and had a boy's mind. He was black as a chimney pot, strong as an ox and walked with a rolling, swaggering gait. Possessed of a disposition as ugly as his bullish face, he was quick to vent his displeasure on anyone who dared cross his path. His temper poured over Martha like hot lead. It frightened her but she said nothing about her wounds. Nobody was ever allowed to say an ill word about Henry in her presence. To hear her tell it, her husband was a saint, an oracle, a giant among men.
But she did not always obey him - even in her early married life. Martha had a stubborn streak in her that even Henry could not erase. She listened carefully when he spoke and held her tongue, obeying his orders if it suited her.
Babies came fast the first twelve years, but none of them survived for more than a few days. Some were still born. One tiny little girl was smothered in the bed clothing, due to the over solicitude of Martha's mother. Martha says she thinks she has had eleven babies in all, but she is not quite certain. Her child bearing days are so far in the past now.
Henry did not trouble himself to provide a home for Martha. Molly was still cooking for the Mortons and had been given the use of a plantation dwelling and a few acres of ground. Henry simply moved from his father's house to his mother-in-law's, bringing nothing with him but his "knapsack" containing a change of clothing, a pistol, a razor and a pair of brass knucks.
The house only had two small rooms and the family were forced to live jammed closely together. Henry and Martha took the choice place by the hearth and Molly had to put up with the little black cubby hole adjoining the "hall." There was generally a big racket going on in the cabin after sundown - Molly berating Henry, Martha screaming out at her mother and Henry growling out heavy obscene oaths. It was not a jolly household.
Molly said that Henry was "a good for nothing, trifling nigger that hardly worth shoot." Martha always jumped to his defense, excusing her husband's inactivity on the ground of illness. As a matter of fact, Henry was seldom ever ill. He was just naturally lazy.
Molly portioned out the work. Henry was to plant a cotton crop and Martha would help him. Molly would contribute her wages she received as cook. Together they should be able to earn a living. This was what Molly had planned but Henry refused to do his share, and the burden of supporting the family was thrown upon the two women. Molly was then almost sixty. She drew four dollars a month and was fed from the White people's kitchen. Martha tried to raise Chickens and fought with the cotton crop.
Chopping cloddy earth with a hoe is a poor substitute for plowing. Henry was not fond of plowing, and he would not take up a hoe. That was Martha's job. The plants struggled through the soil, raising themselves to six inches, produced a few pods of cotton and died. The harvest might bring in ten dollars. Most of the money Henry spent on whiskey and women.
One morning a gentleman from the North visited Molly and told her she was entitled to a Federal pension. Her husband, John Forest had taken part in a Civil War engagement on the Northern side. Molly often told this story:
"The captain push John up. Tell him he got for fight, must get mix up in the battle. Then the big gun shoot, and Great Cod, how John run!"
She didn't tell the investigator this story. It would not have made any difference anyhow. John had not been reported as a deserter and his widow should have a pension.
When the first payment was put into Molly's hands she walked over to Mr. Morton's house and told him she wanted to buy some land. Mr. Morton agreed to sell her four acres on reasonable terms and the contract was drawn.
Next year Molly started building. Henry puffed himself up and boasted mightily to his black neighbors about the house that he had Martha would soon occupy. It was to have two bed rooms and a combination sitting room and kitchen. Henry hung around while the carpenters were working, giving sage advice. This was his sole contribution.
After the cramped plantation cabin, their own house seemed like a mansion. Molly bought two bodsteads, an iron stove. Chairs and tables. The prixe possession was a golden oak organ with a mirror. Every night Molly carefully covered the organ with one of her voluminous petticoats. Henry and Martha could do what they wanted with the rest of the furniture, but no injury must come to the organ.
Almost a year after the organ was purchased, Molly get the idea into her head that Martha must learn to play the instrument. Martha said:
"Great Cod woman. You crazy ain't you? What I know 'bout them thing?"
Molly insisted and finally Martha acquiesced. A woman who lived across the way had put her on her mettle. Martha flared up!
"I going to learn um, you watch and see. Sissy promise for give me lesson. I ain't simple like you. If I set my mind on um, I can lam all right, all right," she told the woman.
Martha was in her fiftieth year then. Her fingers were gnarled and stiff. She hardly knew one letter of the alphabet from the other, having attended school only a few months. But take organ lessons she must. Twice a week she would walk the six miles to "Sissy's" house, her instruction book under her arm.
Her weazened monkey face was screwed up in a knot as she bent over the keyboard, pressing the keys with her forefingers, peering at the little black circles clinging to the lines. This was when she was practicing.
Molly stood over her lending her encouragement. Martha's voice floated through the open window. Her white friends passing by the house heard her Bay: "That's right. Hold B and beat on C. Great God I miss um.....Press on G and hold C. I got um, I got um, Jesus Christ I got um."
A few months later she announced proudly: "I can play two hymn now - Jesus the lover of my soul, and Johnnie get your hair cut, just like mine."
Death came to Molly during the first influenza epidemic. She was about eighty years old and look a hundred. Martha had a hard time readjusting her life to meet the new situation. She had always leaned heavily upon "Ma". Molly had provided most of the food and paid the taxes, bought her daughter's clothing and directed every day's activity.
It was worse than useless to ask Henry to assume any responsibility. He was away from home most of the time. He would pick up a light job on Seacloud plantation, work until he had earned five dollars and then spend all of his accumulation at a dance. He had gone down to Jacksonville the year before Molly's death and had returned home just in time for the funeral adorned in a purple suit. Fifty cents jangled in his pocket.
Sister Susan had been under the ground ten years. She had married and gone north, but had never become accustomed to the climate. Pneumonia had sniffed cut her life in her early forties.
Martha's nearest living relative was her first cousin, Elijah Barron. Now he was some one you could lean upon, Martha said. Elijah had sense.
Mr. Morton read Molly's will the day after the funeral to Martha, Henry and Elijah. The house and the land had been left to Martha during her life time, and after he death would pass to Elijah's two daughters. All of Molly's money - about one hundred dollars in postal savings - the horse and cow, was bequeathed to Martha. Henry was left nothing.
Elijah, then a man of seventy, moved in with Martha and Henry the following month. He said that he wanted to keep an eye on the property that his daughters would eventually inherit. Martha resented the inference that the property might deteriorate in her charge and she and Elijah soon fell out. Martha lost her high opinion of him. She said: "Cousin Elijah too biggity. Take too much on herself." And Elijah openly expressed his scorn of Martha. He told his neighbors that "Cousin Martha awful cranky. I ain't understand how Aunt Molly come to raise such a fool child woman and Auntie been a sensible woman."
Henry and Martha tried raising another cotton crop. They also planted two acres of corn and some peas, so that the cow and horse would have something to eat in the winter. The crop came to a failure as the others before it had done and Martha decided to quit farming as a regular business. Henry would milk no more money from her for fertilizers and seed. She suspected anyway that her husband spent part of the crop money on his outside women.
About this time she announced to the neighborhood in general: "I go stop spend money and live on the interest."
"But how can you live on the interest, Martha?" a White friend asked. "You won't get but about four dollars a year."
"No matter", replied Martha with an air of supreme assurance.
"I live on um all right, all right. I pick up job with Miss Jane and Miss Mary and save what I got."
Martha proceeded to carry out her plan. Servants were scarce on Etiwan and Martha was often called in by White neighbors to scrub and cook, She did nothing well except fry fish and cook rice. If one wanted meals properly prepared it was wise to stand over Martha until the last dish was ready for the table. Every step of the operation must be directed. She was an indifferent scrubber, often leaving the floor dirtier than it was before. It took her two solid hours to wash up dinner dishes for a family of five. Yet she considered herself an accomplished cook and would never admit that any domestic task was beyond her.
Her standard wage was twenty-five cents a day. The work consisted of "helping" her employer with breakfast, washing breakfast dishes, putting on the rice and meat, preparing the vegetables and washing up after dinner. All of this work, could have been done in three hours. It took Martha at least five.
She could not stand up under a regular job. A few times she has cooked steadily for about a month, but this never suited her. "I got my own work for do," she would say. "Got for tie out hog and cow and cook for Henry." No man, I don't want no steady job. I just help you for favor."
She let her money lie in the post office and would not draw cut a cent more than the interest. Although she never earned over seventy cents a week, she managed somehow to clothe herself and pay her church dues and insurance premiums. Every year she pulled her purse strings tighter and tighter. Occasionally she would give Henry a few nickles and if he complained of being especially hungry she would divide her groceries with him. This was the extent of her generosity.
With herself Martha was equally stingy. While in the white man's kitchen she always ate enough to satisfy her modest appetite, but when she was not working for wages, she often would skip a meal rather than dig down into her savings. Coffee grounds, odd pieces of bread, and a slice of butte meat, would carry her for days. She bought the cheapest grade of cloth and made her own garments, or refashioned the dresses that Molly had left behind. She dyed her under things deep purple or black so as to save washing.
Cousin Elijah lived only five years after his move to the Joint home. He went casting for mullets one night in early January and contracted a cold that soon turned into pneumonia. Martha and Henry attended the funeral together. It was the first time they had been seen in company with each other since Molly's burial.
The next day Henry Joint and his wife moved into separate quarters. Martha took the bed room that Elijah had occupied and Henry set up his cot in the wing room which gave onto the kitchen. The separation was very complete. They even divided the pots and pans. There was no argument about it. Both of them felt that this was the beat plan.
Since then their lives have seldom touched. Martha knew that Henry has formed alliances with three or four young women, but she never berates him for his unfaithfulness, or quarrels with him because he often absents himself from home at nights. When Henry becomes tired of carousing, he will race into the house, fall on the bed fully clothed and sleep the clock around. Martha must care for him on these occasions. He does not thank her. He never opens his mouth except to growl about the food she places before him.
Henry becomes involved in many fights. There is always fighting at the dances he attends. He is never without his razor or his brass knucks and uses these weapons on the slightest pretext. He runs with a crowd of boys around sixteen and eighteen. Henry shuns men of his own age for they might show him up for the bully he is. He can generally beat up the youngsters, but sometimes they get the better of "Big Hen."
Henry came home recently with an ugly slash on his right He tried to knock down a fifteen year old boy and the boy had slashed him with a razor.
Martha was furious. "That bad boy cut Henry for plain nothing," she declared. "God, this island have some bad raising boy chillun. Henry try for make peace and that What he get for um. Magistrator oughter handle that boy."
During the last year Henry has been receiving gifts from his sister in New York who has evidently come into a little money. He visits the post office almost every day, looking for packages from the North. The sister sends clothing and sometimes money. Martha knows better than to inquire about these gifts. It would only make Henry angry. He would tell her plainly that it was his money and that she had no share in it.
Martha is devoted to her church where the Rev. John Motte, a little black man with a college degree, preaches every Sunday morning. It is four miles from Martha's house to the church but she makes the journey on foot two Sundays out of the month, at least. She says: "The reverend sure preach fine sermon. Oh, he lick the sinner all right. Mister Mott smart man, bubber. All Prispiterian smart people." Martha is a Presbyterian.
She is very particular about the observance of the Sabbath day. "The day make for worship God and visit the sick," she says. "The devil go get you if you pleasure 'round. Me? Nobody catch me even straighten up a cotton stalk on Sunday.
But somebody did catch her working on the Sabbath once. The rural policeman happened to pass the Joint place early one Sunday and was astonished to find Martha hoeing in Henry's cotton patch.
"Hey, Martha, what are you doing there?" He yelled. "Don't you know this is Sunday?"
Martha dropped her hoe and said: "Gone 'bout your business. Mister Clark. This Saturday."
"But it is Sunday," Mr. Clark insisted. "Look at these people coming down the road all dressed up for Church."
Martha peered down the road. What she saw astonished her. She screamed: "Jesus Christ, it Sunday sure 'nough." Her hands flew up. She went out of the field muttering: "Devil sure put something in my head this morning. Please God forgive me. You know full well I never take a lick with the hoe on Sunday long as I live. The devil the man for blame, not me. He tricky sekker (the same as) snake."
Martha is very fond of visiting the sick. "I yeddy (hear). Cousin Mike very low. Don't spect ho to riscover," some one informs Martha.
Martha answers: "Do Jesus! Uh, uh. I been waitinf for hear that. I see right now I got for go Champion Garden tomorrow, tomorrow."
And when tomorrow comes she is on her way to Champion Garden, dressed in her best black frock, wearing her gold rimmed spectacles. She will return home bubbling over with news about Cousin Mike's condition.
Polly Mack must hear all about it at once. She meets Polly at the cross roads.
"I just come from Cousin Mike house,' she tells her friend, Polly opens her ears and Martha's words pour in.
"He mighty low, begin to swell now. Doctor medicine ain't agree with he complaint. Cousin Betsy 'most crazy. The poor mah very near he grave - awful near. I got to go and gaze on he face once more 'fore he pass over."
Polly grunts: Too bad, too bad. But we all got for go some time."
Martha answers her: "Yes, Lord, we all get for go sometime. You speak the truth Cousin Polly."
The two old women stand in the road, nodding their heads solemnly, repeating the words, ......." all got for go sometime."
Martha is always on hand when a neighbor dies. She and her friends, pressing closely around the death bed, wait with baited breath to hear the last words spoken. Much depends upon those words. If the dying one prays or reports a heavenly vision, the souldwill be lifted up to heaven, they say. But if the vision does not come and there is no prayer offered, the person has "died bad" and his soul will descend to hell.
Martha is frightened when somebody she knows dies bad, for she says that the person's ghost will return to earth to haunt the living.
"I 'fraid to walk the road now," she will proclaim." Josie Smith die yesterday and he spirit going to roam 'round. I sure, God ain't want for meet um."
"A ghost won't really hurt you, will it Martha?"
"No, but he scare you. I sure scared of getting scared."
Martha knows a great deal about ghosts and their habits. "They walk ten foot from the ground and pop same as firecracker," she will tell you. Her voice has an oracular ring to it. "I never see none but I hear um and feel um. One live in that locus' tree close my house and plenty live on Hess Road. The road fair take up with spirit on half moon night. One time I hear um talk together 'bout me. They been roost up in gun tree sekker buzzard and God, they spit out the word. I make track for home quick and throw the cuss on um. Best for cuss ghost; they ain't know no prayer.
"Some night they slip in my house and blow my lamp out. I feel the hot breath on my neck. You ain't safe from ghost even in your own house."
Martha does not mind airing her views on any subject. She is very outspoken on politics, for instance. Martha is a consistant "anti". All laws, all forms of government who considers unjust because governments are formed by white man and laws are enacted by "buckra," without the consent of the Negro, according to her way of reasoning. She is especially bitter about the tax laws.
"Every year I got to pay one or two dollar on my land," she says, resentment creeping into her voice. "The buckra take the money and build white school house and cement road. I don't 'tend school and I ain't got no chillun for 'tend school, and I ain't run no automobile neither. Oh, buckra can fix up up to suit themself, all right."
There is no use tailing Martha that the cement roads are built with taxes paid by automobile owners. She has the idea that miles of hardsurfaced highways have been laid with her tax money.
She does not like the way that Federal relief is handled.
When the destitute of Etiwan were given food and clothing by the FERA several years ago, Martha put out her hand for the bounty. Her application was turned down because she had a husband who was able to work, and also because she owned several cows and a flock of chickens.
She was furious when she heard that the government would give her nothing. "I 'title to um, yes," she said in high strident tones. "I pay tax for 'most thirty year and now when I needy the government turn me down cold. That dead wrong. They oughter give thing to every colored lady on the island."
At seventy-six, Martha walks like a woman of fifty. She has never been seriously ill in her life and cannot remember the time she visited a doctor. She believes firmly in self medication. It cost less than calling a doctor in. Martha will willingly spend fifty cents on a bottle of patent medicine that she thinks may "reach" her complaint. She will take any sort of medicine, especially if it is given to her.
Martha flares up if anyone calls her an old woman. "Who old woman?" she demands. "You the old one, not me. I aintt old and I never go be old."
When one sees Martha hopping along sprightly on her way to church, it is not hard to believe that she will never grow old.
All ambition to rise in the world has left her now. She and Henry live in the battered little house in Seaside evidently content with things as they are. The house la gradually rotting away. Only a remnant of a porch remains, the roof leaks and the floor sags sadly in the middle. Outside, beneath a window is a rusty iron stove that now sees service as a hen nest. The stove was once the pride of Martha'a life. A few broken chairs, is all that is left of the furniture that Molly bought. The organ is mute, but it still occupies an honored place in the hall room.
The walls of the main room are plastered with newspapers and brightly colored calendars of ancient vintage. When the paper gets discolored, Martha merely pastes other sheets from The News and Courier over them. There are probably five or six layers of paper on the walls of the Joint home.
Martha has made few attempts to keep the house in repair. "Cost money for fix house," she comments. "I ain't got no money for waste."
Two chinaberry trees, now covered with myriads of shriveled globules, stand in the front yard. The stable, situated a few yards from the dwelling is a queer looking structure, built of odd pieces of boards nailed against poles. It is always on the verge of collapse, and has been propped up every now and then with new poles. The chicken house, a small replica of the stable, squate near the path that leads to Martha's front door. The sanitary privy, built by WPA labor, is the neatest building on the premises.
With a house at the cross roads and a talkative neighbor next door, Martha is always supplied with material for gossipy tales. She would probably be unhappy anywhere else. From her viewpoint the place is ideally situated. Gossip, black friends and two white employers are all within A radius of a few hundred yards.
Her chief delight is to snatch a bit of gossip out of the air and from it build a sensational story that will alarm and shock her neighbors. She is insulted if her tales are not believed, and will not stand for any contradiction. Faced with facts that prove her story untrue, she will say: "That what they say - that how them boy carry um. I ain't see um myself. You ain't catch me in no lie. I don't lie, bubber."
Henry moves in and out of the house like a black shadow. He hardly matters. Martha seldom talks about him these days. He seems to have given up any pretense of working. Once in a great while he hitches the ox "Messenger Boy" to the plow and puts in an hour breaking land for corn. Most of the time he spends lolling around or walking the road in search of amusement.
Henry claims Messenger Boy as his personal property but Martha has the entire care of the huge beast. The animal often gets out of control. Martha tugs at the rope, trying to lead the ox to pasture. He lower his head and jerks the rope out of the old woman's hand. She falls sprawling to the ground, the impact almost knocking the breath out of her body. Henry will not lift his finger to help. Minding cows is a woman's business, he says.
Martha is not looking forward to the time when she will retire. She does not know the meaning of the word. "I 'spect to work till I drop. Let old woman sit down and suck pipe by the fire. Long as I got my health and strength I going to strive." There is a determined ring to her voice as she utters these words.
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
Approximately 1,800 words
41 C
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
A VETERAN NEGRO JANITOR
Date of First Writing	December 17, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Walter N. Hughes
Fictitious Name	None
Street Address	1428 Taylor street
Place	Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation	Janitor
Name of Writer	Stiles M. Soruggs
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Janitoring doesn't pay a great sight of money. But it is not difficult work, and the pay is sure and regular. That helps keep the wolf away." Such was the cheerful greeting of Walter M. Hughes, polite Negro janitor at the Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church.
"Last Sunday, the Rev. Dr. Samuel K. Phillips, my big boss, said in his sormon, 'It is not what we leave when we die, but how did we earn it while we were here, that counts.
I like that, because it was just what I was thinking.
"I was born on March 3, 1872, in Columbia, and I have lived here all my life. I never was arrested and never was out of a job more than a day or two since I was a little shaver. Lucky? Yep, that's what I call it. I surely an thankful for this, for I have seen many folks suffer for lack of a job all along the rocky read for 66 years.
"The $14 I draw here every Saturday helps to keep my wife and I comfortable. I am very thankful for it and I try to earn it. I've seen many people who didn't have even that sum.
"My daddy was John Hughes and my <text not clear> was Annie (Mitchell) Hughes. They were born in slavery and belonged to white folks by the name they took. Their daddies and mammies were slaves who had been set free under the law after the Civil War. I never heard the talk much about slave days. They didn't live in slavery long enough to learn much about it, and they probably didn't discuss what they knew about it with pleasure.
"Most of the talk I heard between Daddy and Mammy was about work and the conditions that bore down on everybody during reconstruction. They had many white and black friends during my childhood. And they kept busy doing such work as they could find in the years when every one had to do a lot of scratching or suffer.
"They set the work plan for me by their daily life. I learned early that it takes plenty of labor to secure food and clothes. And I have noticed that both white and black people who keep busy doing something worth while generally live pretty well. The wide road of crime leads to jail sooner or later, and I have seen a considerable number land there. Crime never pays in honest money.
"My mammy was busy washing and ironing clothes for white folks of quality when I became old enough to take notice of affairs about our little home. My daddy was so keen to make a living that he would hire out on the big plantations in the country, if he couldn't get a job in Columbia.
"Daddy was a fine trainer of race horses, and a good <text not clear> horse flesh, too. He was employed for several years on the big <text not clear> of General Johnson Hagood, in Barnwell county. He trained the <text not clear> so well that they often won races at Charleston tracks and at the State <text not clear> in Columbia.
"Daddy worked for General Hagood from about 1878 until <text not clear> He could come home sometimes on Sunday to see Mammy and us children, and it was always a happy occasion at our house. It was a happy day for all of us when General Hagood came to Columbia late in 1679 to assume for office of Governor of South Carolina (1880-1992).
"We were pleased because the new governor had chosen <text not clear> drive his carriage from Barnwell to Columbia. Daddy met Mammy and <text not clear> the State House steps and hugged and kissed us both.
"'The general told me as we was comin' along that I <text not clear> in the State House, but he never has told me yet what I was to <text not clear> told Mammy. 'You just wait',' Mammy told him, 'General Hagood <text not clear> of his word, and he will not forget you.' 'Yes, Mammy, I'm not <text not clear>. I just wanted you to know that everything is bright and <text not clear> daddy. The next day after General Hagood bacame governor, Daddy was <text not clear> head janitor of the State House, and he stayed there as long as General Hagood did.
"You pleased mo so much awhile ago when you spoke of my <text not clear> of the English language. I think I'd better tell you know I learned to speak as well as I do. I began to attend Edward school when I was six years old, and I studied there for two years. There I learned to spell a little, read a little, and cipher a little. That two years at school was all I had, but I have kept up my study of books, newpapers, and magazines to this day, whenever I get a chance.
"Some of the hooks and magazines have helped me in the field of janitoring. My reason for quitting school was due to the fact that Paddy died when I was thirteen years old, and I felt it was necessary for me to work and help Mammy make a home for us. My reading aided me. And working for fine white folks further helped me to say what I had to say so it could be easily understood.
"My first earning work was in carrying white folks' clothes, which my mammy had washed and ironed, to their homes. I was not a big boy and I'm not a big man, as you see; and white folks often gave me small coins for making the trip. How and then other white friends got me to carry a note or a package, and they paid me.
"This errand-running work developed, and I was soon adding more to it by selling newspapers on the streets. I was proud to learn later that the newspapers of Columbia gave me a fine recommendation when they found out that I had applied for a job with F. L. Brown & Brothers, big retail grocers of that day, who needed a boy to drive a delivery wagon. I got that job and held it for three years. Then I quit and went to work for the R. B. RcKay firm. The work was similar to my old job. but they paid me more money.
"That firm, in a few years, became the E. T. Hendrix Store, and I delivered goods for the Hendrix firm until it went out of business in 1927. I had begun work at the Brown store at $7.50 a week, and when I transferred to the Rckay store it was raised to $10 a week. When Hendrix took the store, they raised me to $12, and every year added. In 1927, I was drawing $14 a week.
"I was not idle long after Mr. Hendrix quit. He had <text not clear> can that he was, that his health forced him to stop work, and <text not clear> notice so we could look out for other jobs before the old <text not clear> talked with some of my white friends, and one of them went <text not clear> about a job as janitor at the Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church. <text not clear> the next day or two I was called as janitor, and I have been <text not clear> 1927 to date. I am pleased because I never have been harshly <text not clear> for sorry work or conduct in the eleven years I have been hers.
"This eleven-year-old job, which I am lucky enough to <text not clear> no reasonably busy. The Arsenel Hill Church is not the <text not clear> columbia, but it is one of the busiest. There is an average of <text not clear> a day at the church or at the Sunday School annex. The <text not clear> it's annex must be swept and dusted daily. sometimes there <text not clear> more meetings in twenty-four hours, and I take pride in keeping <text not clear> ises as spick-and-span as possible all the time.
"The office and study of the Rev. Dr. S.K. Phillips <text not clear> the annex, and I usually attend to these the first thing in <text not clear> before he arrives. Then I sweep and dust the church <text not clear> return and attend to the remainder of the annex. There is <text not clear> sort of work here over the course of a month.
"In addition, fires must be built in the furnaces of <text not clear> annex for five or six months during the fall and winter <text not clear> the summer period, fans and ice must be looked after. So <text not clear> told, one rust keep going here pretty regularly to keep the <text not clear> in apple pie order. This I try to do. From the treatment <text not clear> experience from the pastor, his secretary, and the membership of the church, I'm inclined to think my services are appreciated here. I'm expecting to get a raise in pay this coming Christmas, if I live. Hints dropped to me indicates such luck.
I've been married twice. My first wife was Ellen Williams. We met at a church social in 1915, and we courted along for almost four years. Sometimes I thought I was hitting in high gear in my drive for a wife, but, like as not, at the very next meeting I had to decide the old car wouldn't do anything but shimmy. But I wouldn't take no for an answer, and in 1919 Ellen and I were married. We lived happily until she got sick in 1927, and it kept me scratching hard and regular to pay our expenses during her illness.
"Ellen's folks moved to Ohio shortly after we married. And, when she took sick, they wanted her to come to them at Cincinnati. They wrote us and said that if she wore there they believed the medicine, the climate, and special attention might bring back her health. I asked her if she wished to go to them, and she said she would be powerful glad to go. But she smiled at me and added, 'My dear hubby, I sure would hate to leave you behind, and I know we could hardly pay for the expense of a trip for me.'
"I was plain worried. My white and black friends noticed my worriment and asked me if I was sick. By and by I told them what was troubling me. The quiet, silent way in which they came to my aid, with dollars, half dollars, quarter dollars, dimes, and nickels, the next few days, warned my heart for all humanity. Ellen and I soon loft for Cincinnati. There her folks made her as comfortable as we could afford, and I kissed her and came back to my work. Ellen didn't improve at Cincinnati. She made a game fight, but death claimed her in 1930. I last looked on her face there, where we burried her.
"I came back home sad and weary. I buckled down to work, but it was sure lonesome at the end of the day to go home to nobody. Not long after that I met Mary Young, and we became friends. In the course of time, I convinced her that married life was the happiest of all. So Mary and I were married in 1937. We began our home life in a little house in the rear of 1428 Taylor Street, Columbia. We still live there. Mary is a good housekeeper, and she side me in making a living, when aha gets a chance to work at some of the white folks' houses.
"Mary also helps to supply our needs in many little ways that I reckon you wouldn't think of. For instance, in the wee home where we live, the yard is small, but she plants sugarcane, poenuts, and potatoes in little comers around the house. She attends these plants like most folks look after flowers, and her thoughfulness in this respect means that we have some good things to eat on long winter evenings.
Project #3613
Stiles M. Scruggs
Columbia, S.C.
12-17-38.
LIFE STORIES
Walter M. Hughes
(Negro)
Rear 1428 Taylor Street
Columbia. S.C.
When Miss Lola Johnson, secretary to the Rev. Dr. Samuel K. Phillips, pastor of Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church, stepped to the door of her office and called "Walter," a merry, cheerful answer came back immediately: "I'm comin', Miss Lola!" Walter M. Hughes, a slender full-blood Negro came forward, with the information that he was 'most done' dusting and was ready for the next task.
"Here's a gentlemen who wishes to talk to you about yourself," Miss Johnson told Walter. He smiled at me and said: "I 'spect the interview won't last long, because I've never done much of anything that was of prime importance." By this time Walter and his caller were seated in the study of Dr. Phillips, who was absent. I noticed how spick-and-span the office appeared and spoke of it to the janitor. Walter said he always started the day's work by cleaning up" the pastor's study.
"I shall be glad to tell you about ups and downs along the rocky road of life, but I'm afraid it will not be of interest, because it has been spent from early life to the present time doing common things, mostly for white folks. I am a native of Columbia, being born here on March 3, 1872, and I am now 66 years old. I do not recall ever being out of work more than a day or two since the time I started working. I am very thankful for this, especially for the last ten years, when I have seen many suffer for lack of employment.
"My daddy was John Hughes and my mammy was Annie (Mitchell) Hughes. They both were born in slavery and belonged to white folks by the names they took. Their daddies and mammies were slaves who were set free about 1866, when Negroes generally went free under the law after the Civil War. I never heard them talk much about slave days. They didn't live in slavery long enough to learn much about it, and they prob'ly didn't recall what they know 'bout it with pleasure. Most of the talk I heard between my daddy and mammy was 'bout work and the condition we was then in. They had many white and black friends during my childhood, and they kept busy doing such work as they could find in those years when everybody had to do a lot of scratching or suffer. They set the work plan for me by their example. And it takes plenty of it to secure good food and clothes. I notice both white and black people who keep busy generally live well.
"My mammy was busy washing and ironing clothes for the white folks of quality when I became old enough to begin noticing affairs about our humble home. My daddy was so keen to make an honest living that he would hire out to the big planters in South Carolina, if he could not get regular employment in Columbia. Daddy was a fine trainer of thoroughbred horses, and a good judge of horses, too. He was employed for some years on the big plantation of General Johnson Hagood, in Barnwell County. He trained General Hagood's thoroughbreds so well that they often won races at State fairs and at the Charleston race track.
'From about 1878 until 1880, daddy was employed on the Hagood plantation. He could come home sometimes on Sunday to soe Mammy and the children. It was a happy day for all of us when General Hagood came to Columbia late in 1870 to assume the office of Governor of South Carolina (1880-1882). We were pleased because the new governor had chosen daddy to drive his carriage from Barnwell to Columbia. Daddy met us on the State House steps and hugged and kissed us both. "The General has told me that I am to work in the State House as long as he does, but he hasn't told me what I am to do yet,' daddy told mammy. She smiled and said, 'You just wait. General Hagood is a man of his word, and he will not disappoint you.' 'Yes, Mummy, I am not worried. I just wanted you to know that everything is bright and sunny,' said daddy.
"The next day after General Hagood took office as governor, daddy was appointed head janitor at the State House, and he stayed there as long as Governor Hagood did.
"You pleased ms much awhile ago when you spoke of my use of the English language. I think I might tell you about how I learned to talk as well as I do, which is nothing to brag on. I began to attend Howard School when I was just a little more than six years old, and I kept up my school work there for two years. There I learned to read a little, write a little, and cipher a little. The two years at Howard School completed my school career. But I have kept on with my school books, when I got a chance, to this day.
"For years I've bought magazines, and some of the tales I've read help me be a better janitor. My reason for quitting school was due to the fact that my daddy died when I was thirteen years old, and I felt it was necessary for me to work and help my mammy keep the wolf from our door. Constant reading of books and papers, when I was not working, improved my mind. And since I was pretty regularly employed by fine white folks, I made it a habit to notice what they said, and that helped me to speak better and act right. It also kept me from being puffed up when I was with my black folks.
"My first earning work was in carrying white folks' clothes, which my mother had washed and ironed, to their homes. I was not a big child and I'm not a large man, as you see; and white folks often gave me a small coin for making the trip. Other white friends sometimes got me to carry a note or a package, and they paid am. By and by, this errand work developed, and I was soon earning money by selling newspapers on the streets. I've been proud to know that the newspapers of Columbia, for which I sold papers, gave me a fine recommendation when they found out that I had applied for a job with F. L. Brown & Brothers. big retail grocers of that day, who needed a boy to drive a delivery wagon. I got the job and held it for three years. I quit to take another job, similar to the one I had left, with R. B. McKay & Brothers, because they offered me more money than the other firm was paying me.
"At the end of two years with the McKay firm, I quit to drive for Baldwin & Son, for the same reason, an increase in pay. That firm, in the course of a few years, became the E. T. Hendrix Store, and I delivered goods to customers for Hendrix until that firm went out of business, in 1927. I was not idle long after Mr. Hendrix quit operation of his store. I talked with some of my white folks' friends, and one of them went with me to see about a job as janitor of Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church. I began work here in a few days, and I've never been harshly reprimanded for sorry work or for sorry conduct in the elevan years I've worked here, from 1927 to 1938.
"This 11-year-old job, whioh I'm lucky enough to hold, keeps me reasonably busy. The Arsenal Hill Presbyterian Church is not the largest church in Columbia, but it's one of the busiest. There is an average of one meeting a day at the church or at the Sunday School annex. The church and its annex must be swept and dusted daily. Sometimes there's two or more meetings every twenty- four hours. The office and study of the pastor, the Rev. Dr. Samuell K. Phillips, are located in the annex, and I usually attend to these in the morning before the occupants arrive. Then I sweep and dust the pews in the annex and in the church. The annex is built into the church building and, all told, there is a good deal of sweeping and dusting each day.
"For most of five or six months in the fall and winter season, fires must be made in the offices of the pastor and his secretary. The church and annex must also be heated. During the summer season fans must be kept humming, and there is about as much work needed at one season as another. I take a keen interest in the plan to keep the whole church plant in apple pie order.
"From the treatment that I usually experience from the pastor, his secretary, and the membership of the church. I'm inclined to think that my services are appreciated here, and it pleases me. I'm not making a great sight of moneys; but the fourteen dollars a week that they pay me comes along regular. With it I manage to pay three dollars and fifty cents a month house rent end twenty- five cents a week for burial insurance, besides buying enough food, fuel, and clothes for us to live fairly comfortable.
"I've been married twice. My first wife was Ellen Williams. We met at our church social in 1915, and we courted along for most four years. Sometimes I thought I was making great progress in the drive for a wife, but, like as not, at the very next meeting I had to decide I was losing favor rapidly. This courtship was brought to a climax in 1919, when I led Ellen Williams to the marriage altar. Our married life was very happy until she got sick in 1927. It kept me scratching pretty hard to make my wages pay our expenses during her illness.
"Ellen's folks had moved to Ohio shortly after we married. They wanted Ellen to come to them at Cincinnati. They wrote us and said that if she were there they believed the medical attendance and the climate might bring her back to health. I asked her if she wished to go to them at Cincinnati, and she said she would be powerful glad to go. But she smiled at me and added, dear hubby, I sure would hate to leave you behind, and I know we can hardly pay for the expense of a trip for me.'
"I was plain worried. My white end black friends noticed my worryment, and asked me if I was sick. By and by I told them what was troubling me. The quiet, silent manner in which they came to my aid, with dollars, half dollars, quarter dollars, dimes, and nickles, the next few days warmed my heart for all humanity. Ellen and I soon left for Cincinnati. There her folks and me made her as comfortable as we could afford, and I kissed her and came back to my work. Ellen didn't improve at Cincinnati. She made a game fight, but death claimed her in 1930. I last looked on her face out there, and she was buried there.
"I came back home sad and weary. I buckled down to work, but it was terribly lonesome when it came time for me to go home to nobody. I soon met Mary Young, and me became friends. In the course of time, I convinced her that married life was the happiest of all. And I led her to the marriage altar in 1937. We began our home life in a little house in the rear of 1428 Taylor Street, Columbia. We still live there. Mary is a good housekeeper, and she aids me in making a living, when she gets a chance to work at some of the white folks' homes.
"Mary also helps me supply our needs in many little ways that I reckon you wouldn't think of. For instance, in the wee home where we live, the yard around the house would hardly be large enough to plant a row of corn in. Well, in a snug corner of the meager yard, Mary planted an artichoke; in another, a hill or two of Irish potatoes; and close by, a few peanuts. She has attended to them like moat woman attend to their flowers, and it means some good things we shall have to eat this winter.
"My daddy built us a house on Senate Street, just about where the Atlantic Coast Line track is now. It was ready for the roof one day, and workman came there to put it on. Daddy stopped them. 'If you put the shingles on in the light of the moon,' he told them, 'they will ourl up at the ends. Next week it will be the dark of the moon and then we'll put the roof on. It will not ourl up then.' You know I have always kept that in mind. If I ever cover a house, I will follow daddy's advice.
"Mammy told me always to make a cross mark in the sand if I start some wheres and have to go back for something. She said it would drive away bad luck. I never forgot that, either, and I still do it. Mary and I talk about such things sometimes. She knows potatoes and all root crops must be planted in the dark of the moon to produce well."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
Title: ROBERT JOSEPH GANTT
Date of first writing-	February 15, 1939.
Name of person interviewed-	Robert Joseph Gantt.
Fictitious name	None.
Address	Spartanburg, S.C.
Occupation-	Attorney.
Name of writer	D. A. Russell.
Name of reviser-	
"I'm not making a lot of money, but I live well, huh; Financially, I don't guess I would be called a successful lawyer, but I've never been hungry, and my home is my own, huh? I owe a little money, but it's not pressing. I don't have to worry like acme people I know, huh?"
Robert Joseph Gantt, who, in point of service, is the third oldest member of the Spartanburg bar, is a typical country lawyer. There is no "put on" about Bob Gantt. He's just "the Judge" to all of his acquaintances in Spartanburg, and has received the title during all the years since he served as a city magistrate in Spartanburg. He's "plain as an old shoe," if you please, and he knows it, and, furthermore, likes it!
No, he doesn't make so much money, to be true, but he doesn't worry. On some days he makes as much as $50.00--"when business is good"--and most of the tine he is satisfied if he picks up a case that will net him $5.00 or $10.00 for his services. During the present hard times, he will average $30.00 a week, sometimes more, most often less. The estimate is his own. There are days, however, when no money is forthcoming, and clients are scarce. He makes a persistent effort to secure all of his legal fee from his client in advance, but failing in this, he will ask for at least half of it as a "down payment." If he fails in that effort, then he will consent to wait until his client has a pay day--that is, if he is convinced that his client has a habit of receiving weekly or monthly pay envelopes!
Judge Gantt was born at Elbert on, Georgia, on May 15, 1872, the son of T. Larry Gantt, a country newspaper editor, and founder of the Oglethorpe Echo at Lexington, Georgia. His father was once a power in Georgia politics, and after he came to Spartanburg in 1691 to establish the Piedmont Headlight, he became a staunch supporter of Ben Tillman, and remained so until his death in 1933. For years his influence was felt in politics in the Palmetto State.
Practically all of Judge Gantt's boyhood was spent in Georgia. The family moved to Athena, Ga., when Larry Gantt purchased the Athena Banner and the Southern Watchman, combining the two papers under the name of the Banner-Watchman. Judge Gantt had attended and graduated from the University of Georgia, and he came with his father to Spartanburg when the latter began publication of the Piedmont Headlight. Shortly after coming to Spartanburg, however, young Gantt, through the friendship of his father with Hoke Smith, of Georgia, then Secretary of the Interior Department in Grover Cleveland's cabinet, received an appointment to the Interior Department at Washington. Gantt found that his closest friend in the Interior Department was Josephus Daniels, of Raleigh, N.C., afterwards editor of the Raleigh News & Observer, and later Secretary of the Navy in the cabinet of Woodrow Wilson, war-time President. Mr. Daniels was at that time chief clerk of the Interior Department. Judge Gantt says that his friendship with Daniels has lasted through the years, and he takes every opportunity he has to see his former "boss," 'as he refers to Daniels.
Judge Gantt remained in the Interior Department until the election of President McKinley, and then he was offered, and accepted, the position of private secretary to Senator J.L.M, Irby, of South Caroline, During the at Georgoetown University, and upon his graduation was nineteenth in a class of over two hundred students. When he had attended the University of Georgia, he had hopes of becoming a civil engineer after graduation, and had received a degree in engineering.
"I sometimes wonder," he says today, "if it wouldn't have been better for me to have become a civil engineer rather than to practice law? But it's too late to change now-if I wanted to."
After his graduation in law at Georgetown University, Judge Gantt returned to Spartanburg to hang out his shingle in 1896, and for forty- six years he has been a resident of the "Hub City." He says that although he is a Georgian by birth, he is a Carolinian by adoption. He has no relatives in Georgia at the present time, but has several in South Carolina.
Judge Gantt believes that he is the only living person in Spartanburg, and perhaps elsewhere, who, as a youth, saw and talked to Jefferson Davis, who later became President of the Confederacy, and Alexander Stephens, who became Vice President of the Confederacy. He was eleven years of age when these two Southern leaders visited with his father in their Georgia home. Thomas Wilding Gantt, of Lowndesville, S.C., who was the grandfather of Judge Gantt, was a Major in the brigade of General Robert Toombs, of Georgia, during the War Between the States.
Judge Gantt was married to Dr. L. Rosa Hirschman, of Charleston, and this union lasted for almost twenty years until the death of Dr. Gantt about three years ago. Mrs. Gantt was a remarkable woman, especially in view of the fact that women doctors were not looked upon so favorably in a town the size of Spartanburg. Nevertheless, she won national recognition in her practice, specializing in the eye, ear, nose and throat. At one time she was chairman of this branch of the American Medical Association. Her personal charm and her ability won for her leadership in women's club activities in Spartanburg. Since the death of Mrs. Gantt, Judge Gantt has called himself the "chief cook and bottle washer."
To say the least, Judge Gantt is a unique character, and while his dress and mannerisms may not appeal to the masses, his ability as a lawyer is respected by all members of the bar. Without knowing, one would never suspect Judge Gantt, on first acquaintance, to be a lawyer. He is far from immaculate in his dress; and his hat, like his suit, shows unmistakable signs of having survived many winters. He goes to and from his office to his home, located in the mountains near Tryon, N.C., in an automobile he purchased second-handed in 1925. He insists to friends who have tried to prevail upon him to buy another car, that he does not need one, despite the fact that it requires about an hour and a half for him to travel the twenty-five miles from his office to his home.
"I just tell them I don't need another oar, huh?," he told the writer. "This one serves my needs. It gets me back and forth, and that's all I want it for, huh?" Judge Gantt confided to the writer that he could purchase another oar if it was absolutely necessary, but "there's lets more years in this car yet, huh?"
To reach Judge Gantt's office you go up a flight of stairs that give withbevery step taken, enter a dark hallway, and turn to the first door on the right. His office is not of the type you would expect to find being used by a man of his acknowledged ability. Seven cabinets of law books, many of them of much value, almost crowd him out of the window into West Main Street. You can see that the ceiling was once covered with yellow paper, and that the walls were at one time calcimined in green, long Ago faded. He uses an old walnut desk that he says is over sixty years old, and it is scattered over with papers. Nothing is arranged. It is a picture of a country editor's desk. The dust has settled on most of the papers thereupon. Hanging immediately over his desk is a framed picture of Senator Irby, wearing a campaign hat. Nearby, a frame holds the diploma Judge Gantt received at the University of Georgia in the nineties, but it is necessary for you to part the dust with your fingers before being able to read it. Apparently, there is no janitor service in the building he occupies, or at least, not for his single room.
In a corner of the room is a small sink which is badly in need of washing. Above the sink is nailed a ten-cent mirror. A soiled towel hangs from a nail nearby. On a shelf to the left of the wash basin are two glasses, a box of soda, and a large bottle of kidney pills. There is a coal bin in the room, and a drum of kerosene. The room is heated by a small laundry heater. A small pan of water is on top of the heater, and the room is kept uncomfortably got, even though it is cold outside. There is a trash can beside his desk that is forever empty, since the uncarpeted floor is used for unwanted papers. Occasionally he sweeps out his office, but only when he feels that he has to in order to clear a path for his own entrance. There are three chairs, one of them being an old-fashioned rocker more than forty years old which he says he made himself.
If you ask him the age of the old law books on the shelves, he will tell you that many of them are over a hundred years old. Then, he will get up from his rocker, go to a cabinet and hand you a book that is covered with dust, titled, "The Symboleography-Newly Corrected and Amended and Verie Much Enlarged in All Four Severall Treaties. Printed for the Companie of Stationers-1618. Cum Privilegio." Judge Gantt tells you that he could, if need be, sell this particular book for quite a sun, but that he will not do so "unless the wolf comes to the door, huh?"
In sharp contrast to the shabby appearance of his office, is his home, nestled in the Carolina mountains near Tryon, which is a picture of contentment and peacefulness. From the main highway, just beyond Tryon, you turn to the left and continue up a winding dirt road for about a mile until you reach "Liberty Hall," which Judge Gantt calls his home place. The two-story frame structure is situated on a hill right in the heart of the mountains, and the picture from the flower garden looking towards the mountains, is one for an artist to paint. Many years ago Judge and Mrs. Gantt built this home in the mountains.
The front door of "Liberty Hall" opens into a spacious living room where, during the winter month a, a log fire is burning. All modem conveniences are available, even to a hot air furnance in the basement, which Judge Gantt has not fired up since his wife's death. There is no telephone, but, as Judge Gantt says, "I don't want one here, for when I get home I want to forget the court room and my clients, huh?"
To the left of the living room is the dining room, and to its right, the kitchen, which has a frigidaire. His water is supplied from a well that he helped to dig himself, and the water is always cool.
French doors in the living room open into Judge Gantt's library, where he has A large number of valuable books and personal papers of his father. He has a first edition of poems by Robert Burns, which is valuable to any collector, and other books that would bring him hundreds of dollars were they placed on sale. He how some of the original manuscripts of Henry W. Grady, the crusading Georgia editor of a generation ego, who was favorite of both Judge Gantt and his father when they resided in Georgia, and whom the Judge knew as a young men while at the University of Georgia. He will sit end reminisce for hours on Grady, Robert Toombs, Alexander Stephens, Jefferson Davis, Thomas Wetson, Eli Whitney, Ben Tillman, and many others who made history in the years past.
The upstairs has four bed rooms and two bath rooms and three large closets. There is one room that no one but himself is permitted to enter. It is the bed room used by Era. Gantt. Everything is just as she left it. Judge Gantt stopped the clock on her mantel at the very minute end hour of her death.
Each day, after Judge Gantt leaves for his office in Spartanburg, the house is a leaned by a woman who, with her husband and two children, live in a home which Judge Gantt built in the roar of his place. The husband acts as caretaker of the twenty-three acres which the Judge owns in the mountains.
The judge does his own cooking, and when he has invited guests, talks boastingly of his preparation of the meals. And all who have eat at his dinner table come away praising his culinary ability. His Sunday dinner, for example, may consist of the following: broiled ham two inches thick, with gravy; boiled Irish potatoes, baked sweet potatoes, carrots and peas, rice, tomatoes and celery, and hot biscuits and coffee. In the evening, if you feel the need of additional food, the Judge will offer you swiss cheese, rye bread and coffee. In the morning you will be served with scrambled eggs, toast and coffee, and grape fruit.
After his evening meal, unless he has company. Judge Gantt enjoys the solitude of his library, where he will continue work on a book he is writing. He thinks he will give it the title, "A History of Upper South Carolina," He has been working on this book for two years, he says. He hopes to finish it during the next few months. Ha hopes, also, to prepara a book on the Spartanburg bar similar to Judge O'Neall's Bench and Bar of South Carolina; and toward this purpose he has accumulated a mass of material. He might find embarrassment if required to write a three-figure check on short notice; but he can always give a guest a warm welcome, a comfortable bed, and a good meal; and he can always answer an intelligent question about the county of Spartanburg.
Such is Judge Robert Joseph Gantt, respected member of the Spartanburg bar, a Tillmanite to the end, a country gentleman, and an author with perception and insight.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITER'S PROJECT
Life History
Title: WILLIAM DONALD MITCHELL
Date of first writing:	Feb. 22, 1939.	
Name of person interviewed:	William Donald Mitchell (White)	
Fictitious name:	"Mitch."	
Street address:	Central Fire Station	
Place:	Spartanburg, S. C.	
Occupation:	City fireman.	
Name of writer:	D. A. Russell	
Name of reviser:		
"I was born on Sept. 15, 1866, in Fairview township, Greenville County, and am the son of John Mitchell and my mother, Mattie Donald Mitchell, father was a farmer, but during the War between the States, he was superintendent of a yam mill at Cedar Falls.
"I was married to Effie Johnson, of Statesville, N.C., in 1916, and she died in 1928. We had three children, a daughter and two sons. After my wife's death I sold our home on Walker Street, and have been living at the fire station ever since.
"I never had but two week's schooling in my life. This was when I was ten years old and I went to the Fairview school. My mother died when I was eleven years old, and soon thereafter I went to live with my grandfather and worked on his farm. I stayed with him until his death. I was seventeen years old then.
"I hired out then to Lewis Thompson, in Greenville County, for $8 a month and board. I stayed with him for about four years and decided to farm for myself. I averaged around two hundred bushels of corn and eight bales of cotton during the year. I soon learned to buy and sell horses, and in 1894 made up my mind to come to Spartanburg where I secured work with Mr. Finch Alexander, who was running a livery stable. I helped him run the business, buying and selling horses for him. My pay was $10 per month and board. I also received a small commission on the selling of horses and mules. I was with him for three years, or until I was elected a fireman in 1897.
"I am now seventy-two years old and will be seventy-three this coming September. I am the oldest city fireman, both in years and in service. I am also the oldest city employee, they tell me. I have been a fireman for forty-two years, and for twenty-eight years of that time I served as chief of the department. I was the first paid fireman employed by the town. I was elected a fireman on Sept. 20, 1897, during the administration of Mayor Arch B. Calvert. My salary was $30 per month. There were only two pieces of apparatus then-a hose and chemical wagon, drawn by two horses, and a steam engine. Moses Greenewald was the chief, and he received $100 yearly. Bob Wilder was employed as a fireman after me, and later, Will Salder, negro.
"The first fire station was a one-story frame building, with a dirt floor, which was located east of the present city hall on Broad Street. There were two stalls for the horses. Then there was a fire the bell in the opera house was tolled, and the number of rings would tell us which ward the fire was in. Only the hose wagon would respond first, but if the fire was a big one, and the steamer was needed, the horses were unhitched from the hose wagon, brought back to the station, hitched to the steam engine, and started to the scene of the fire. Strips of bacon were used to start a fire in the engine as it left the station, and by the time it reached the scene of the blaze, the old pumper was red hot.
"There were no paved streets then, and most of the time, or rather, a great part of the time, we had to respond to a fire in mud ankle deep. We simply got to a fire the best we could, and sometimes we arrived too late to save the house or building, and could only keep the fire from spreading. We had to depend on the volunteers to respond to every alarm. There were no electric lights then, as kerosene lights were used on the lamp posts. The lamp lighter made his rounds every evening. I remember that Henry Alley was chief of police then.
"Most of the boys always referred to me at 'Mitch,' even after I was elected chief of the department in 1911. That was on Sept. 11. I succeeded E.S. Kennedy, who resigned. I served as assistant chief for five years before my election as chief. Mr. L.T. Cothran, at present a city commissioner, succeeded me as chief of the department in 1933. salary as chief was $196 monthly. present salary, that of a private, is $130.
"I have served during the administration of six mayors of Spartanburg. They were in the following orders Mr. Calvert, John F. Floyd, Boyce Lee, O.L. Johnson, Ben Hill Brown, and the present mayor, T.W. Woodworth.
"When I joined the department, or "when they elected me a fireman, we had about sixty volunteer firemen and four paid members. There were three volunteer companies. They were 'The Champions,' 'The Reds,' and 'The Bonnie Blue,' the last company being Negroes. Chief Greenewald did not live at the department, but stayed at his home. Bob Wilder, Will Salder, the Negro, and myself stayed at the fire hosue day and night. We were on duty for twenty- four hours, and were given a half a night off once a month. Today we have two stations being used, and a third that was abandoned in 1931. There are eight pieces of motorized apparatus, an up-to-date fire alarm system, and thirty-seven men, who work on twelve-hour shifts. When station No. 2 -was discontinued, that put eight men out of work.
"What was the town's largest fire? Well, I am sure that it was the fire that destroyed fifty-nine houses in the Spartan Mill community in 1907. Inadequate water supply, coupled with the fact that it was a windy day, made the conflagration all the worse. All the firemen and volunteers could do -was to prevent it from spreading further.
"I suppose that the red-letter date in the history of the fire department, was on Feb. 8, 1909, when city council signed a contract for an electrical fire alarm system to be installed by the Gamewell Fire Alarm Company. Thirty- five alarm boxes were installed at first, and gradually additional boxes were placed until now there are seventy-nine located throughout the city, which includes boxes at Wofford and Converse Colleges and the General Hospital.
"It takes the fire apparatus less than a minute to leave the fire station after an alarm is sounded. It may seem strange to you, but the trucks can get out quicker during the night than in the day-time. I can explain it this way: After the firemen have retired, and an alarm comes in, all they do is jump into their boots, slide down the poles, jump to their places on the apparatus, and start going. Many times they have to wait for the first round to come in before they start. When an alarm is turned in from a box, it is repeated four times at the fire stations. When the first round is completed, the signal operator cheeks it -with the number of holes punched in the tape, and signals for them to get going. We go by the tape. We know that will be correct. Sometimes, but very seldom, the gong indicator has tapped the -wrong number. Usually it requires less than thirty seconds to leave the station at night. Now, during the day-time, the firemen may be scattered about the house, same doing duties, each as scrubbing, shining the brass, etc., when an alarm comes in, and it quire a few second' more to get out. However, it has never required as a full minute before the trucks left the house and were on their way.
"For the past six years I have been the switchboard operator and answer the telephone at the central station. I do not do any fire fighting now. I guess they think I am too old to do much good at a blaze. Maybe I am slowed up a bit, but I can still get out and fight a fire if needed. It is my duty to see that the alarm, if sounded from a box, tallies with the indicator and the tape. When a fire alarm is telephoned, I must ascertain for sure the correct address from excited persons who, on many occasions, cannot give their own home address. I suppose it is natural for people, especially women, to become excited when their home is on fire. Often an excited woman will merely scream; 'Came quick, our house is burning,' and forget to give the address. I have, on several occasions, had to call back the telephone operator, and find out where the call came from. You see, we request all of the telephone operators to listen in on all fire calls. I have asked excited women where the house was, and they would have to call another member of the family to the phone to give us the address.
"Oh, yes, we have been called upon to perform many unusual requests during the years I have been in service. I think one of the most unusual calls we ever received over the phone was when we raised a ladder to get a drunken man off the roof of a house on East Main Street about two years ago. Also, there was the time about three years ago when a lady living in the Converse Heights section of the city locked herself in the bathroom, and had a neighbor call the fire department. We went out and put up a ladder and she came out the bathroom window.
"About fifteen years ago we went out on Golden Street and pulled a mule out of a well thirty feet deep. First, we got a Negro to go down into the well, tie a rope around the front legs of the animal, and make a loop over his head to keep his head erect. We then pumped the well full of "water and this floated the mule to the top. The animal belonged to Converse College.
"In 1930 we took the extension ladder to a location on East Main Street near the corner of Converse, and got a woman tree-sitter from her perch in the top of a huge tree. She had been up there for two days and nights. It was during the 'tree-sitting craze'. A storm had come up rather suddenly, and she became too afraid to climb down from the swaying tree.
"Several years ago we rescued a dog from a well on Wofford Street, and in 1927 we pulled a frightened cat from a well on Seay Street. One request, however, that we did not fulfill, was that of the lady who called us a few months ago and asked that we come to her home on Hydrick Street and 'smoke some rats out of her basement.'
"But I suppose the most unique request we ever had, through all the years I have been a fireman, was about two months ago when some lady in Converse Heights called over the 'big phone' and wanted to know if we would start a fire in her furnace the next morning at 6 o'clock! Then requests like that come, I don't know whether those making the call are just plain dumb, or whether they are doing it for a joke. At least, they don't stop and think.
"I take very little time off. I stay at the station practically day and night, regardless of the shift I am on. It is home to me now- the only home I have. Two of my children are married, and occasionally I visit with them, and enjoy it. My youngest boy graduated from Wofford College, and is now in training as an aviator for the United States Amy. He was the third highest in his marks when he graduated a year ago. I am very proud of him, and I wish he hadn't taken up flying. But, on the other hand, I think a father should let his children choose their own career in life, so long as it is an honorable one.
"I know that I haven't many more years to go, but I do not want to have any lingering illness. I hope to die in harness-just like old 'Jake' did, when he and 'Joe' were two of the best horses ever hitched to a fire wagon. Now I think I have told you everything about me that's worth mentioning. Tell the truth, guess I have told you too much!"