THE HOLLIFIELDS
"What a beautiful thought I am thinking concerning the
great speckled bird,
The great speckled bird in the Bible representing the
great Church of God."
The doleful monotony of Grace Hollifield's voice spreads itself over the words of "The Great Speckled Bird" and hits (discordantly against the plunkety notes of her mandolin and her father's banjo.' Over line after line Grace's voice drags its way to tell the story of worldly opposition to "The Great Speckled Bird," and of the bird's ultimate victory.
"They hate her because she is chosen
They watch every move that she makes.
They want to find fault in her teaching
...She is spreading her wings for a journey
She will meet her dear Lord in the sky."
Sometimes six year old Edith joins her sister in her hymn singing, and her child-voice will rise in weird, strange tones to tell that there is room for all at the foot of the Cross.
Sometimes the Hollifields will gather on their small front porch and at other times in the dingy living room of their home on Factory Hill to play and sing hymns. Singing and playing are daily activities in the Hollifield home. On the porches of houses nearby neighbors sit and listen, some with great liking and others with growing resentment. Disapproval is of little consequence to the Holifields because they consider it their duty as well as their pleasure to sing religious songs that others may hear and become converts. Only a few people on Factory Hill attend church, except during revival season, and for that reason the Hollifields sing with double zeal.
Nine years ago when Jed and Evelyn moved to Factory Hill they joined the Salvation Army of Asheville and they have encouraged their children to accept the teachings of the organization. Last year they dedicated little Edith to its services and now on Saturday nights she joins her family and other members of the organization on the streets of Asheville to sing and to play on her tambourine. Tom, the oldest son who is now married, plays the violin and often comes from his house across the hill to Join his family in their playing. "It aint often you see 4 members of a family talented in music. is it?" Jed asks with pride.
Jed, born in Madison County, North Carolina, was five years old when his mother died. He was sent then to live with his aunt who owned a small farm near Pickens, South Carolina. There he worked until he was nineteen years old with never any hope of making more than a bare living. His aunt had six children and what few advantages she could provide were given to them.
During those years when he was growing up Jed thought often of his brother, Charley, two years older than he, who had been sent to live with an aunt in Gaffney, South Carolina. Word reached Jed a few years after he went to his new home that Charley had run away and his relatives had not heard from him since. There were nights when he lay awake wondering what had become of his brother. He tried to hold fast to the belief that some kind person had given him a good home and that he and his brother would eventually be brought together again. But there were times when he was haunted with the harassing thought that Charley had died of hunger as he struggled on mile after mile on a journey that had no destination.
Jed found very little affection in his aunt's household. He did not learn to like the farm and when he was nineteen he determined to make a new life for himself. He went to Greenville and there secured a Job in the weave room of a cotton mill. Two years later he married Evelyn whose father had moved out of Madison County to Asheville Mill and later to Greenville. The mills needed hands in those days and Jed with his young wife moved from mill to mill, sometimes with the hope of betterment and sometimes because an overbearing superintendent made demands which his pride could not stand. "I don't mind doin' my work but I've always wanted to be treated like a man," he says.
One move took the Hollifields to Gastonia, North Carolina. On a Saturday afternoon not long after moving to Gastonia Jed was in the barber shop up-town looking through a newspaper, when he saw the name of Charley Hollifield signed to an advertisement of livestock for sale. He rushed home to tell his wife that at last he had discovered the whereabouts of his brother. Not wanting Jed to build too great a hope of his discovery Evelyn suggested that someone else might have the same name. Jed knew there was only one way to satisfy his mind. After a number of inquiried he found out that Charley Hollifield lived on a farm about seven miles from town. Jed tells his story as follows: "Hit was a strange feelin' ridin' out there to see the man who had the name that had stayed in my mind all them years. I knew it would be a awful disappointment if it turned out to be somebody else. When I got there Charley was settin' on the porch, and it never took a minute for me to make up my mind. Lookin' at him comin' forward to meet me it was just like lookin' in a mirror at myself. I think he must have knowed just as quick as I did that we was brothers. I set there for two or three hours talking to him while he told? me how he crawled in the back of a apple wagon that had come down out of the mountains, and how the driver, not knowing he was there until he was a good ways out of town, took him on home with him. He wasn't but nine then, but ever since he's been at Aunt Mattie's he'd felt that she didn't want him and that she thought' of him as" nothin' but a burden since she had eight younguns of her own anyway. The driver kept him in his home for about a year. After that he worked out here and there, living with first one and then another until he was fifteen years old. Restlessness and dissatisfaction come on him again and he bummed his way to Texas. He worked there at odd jobs until he was seventeen, and then come back to North Carolina and stopped near Gastonia. He got work on old man Thad stone's place and when he was twenty-two he married the old man's daughter, Bonnie, When Mr. Stone died he left Bonnie a good piece of farmin' land and there her and Charley have been over since, Charley has took advantage of his chance and he's made a fair livin' for his family. I shorely feel like God guided me in findin' my brother."
Jed moved to the Asheville Cotton Mill because the doctors advised a mountain Climate for Evelyn. She has not been able to work for many years and the entire burden of his family's support rests with Jed, who now gets three days' work a week. Jed's two oldest sons are married but there are three children still at home. Grace is frequently ill and requires medical treatment.
Jed bears his responsibilities with a sereneness which makes him at forty-six look not more than forty years of age. He discusses with perfectly controlled feelings his opinion of the mill at which he works. He thinks that the stretch out system has put on him more work than is just but he realizes his own helplessness. "This is a ugly place to live," he says. "No roads, dirty unscreened houses and no yard for plantin' a few flowers. But a man that's got dependents would take a lot today before he'd quit his job because he knows that like as not he won't find another. It seems to us that work that all folks could have plenty of food and reasonable good clothes and a decent place to stay," he continues, looking steadily at his listener. "They could, I know, if they wasn't so much selfishness in the world."
Jed sits quietly for awhile, seeming to reflect on his own words. Presently he looks at his visitor and says, "Me and the girls will be glad to play you a piece if you like." Edith, get your tambourine and help me and Grace with "Kneel at the Cross." They get their instruments and begin to play and sing. Jed's mind now seems free. His eyes are clear and bright as he sings:
"Jesus will meet you there,
There is room for all at the foot of the Cross."
Spencer Mill Village
Spindale, N. C.
September 26, 1938
NINA BOONE
They live right on the rim of Happy Hollow. Their small three-room house looks out over a strip of woods in which are located all hogpens belonging to residents of Happy Hollow. Happy Hollow is that part of the Spencer Mill Village which rambles gradually over three streets, down into a valley-space covered by green, shade-giving trees. The day in late September when I went to see Mina Boone, I went past the little valley, followed the up-grade, duety road around a bend and stopped in front of Nina's house.
The front of the house perched up on tall, skinny, brick pillars which gave its rear and the appearance of having been dumped on the ground. Up under the front of the house Nina has stored as old trunk and a broken-down chair Nine has no room inside for storing any article not in use. She tries as best she may to provide living-space for her six children, herself, and husband.
I heard the heavy tread of an old sewing machine come to an abrupt halt as I walked up on the porch. Tiny feet scurried over the rough floor, and when Nina came to the door three of her small children were at her heels.
Come on in if you can push your way through this crowd of little ones," she said and smiled. I thought as I looked at her how queer it was for a middle-aged women to have so many children who were still babies. For everything about her face led me to believe she must be more than forty-five. Her light brown hair was drawn smoothly back from her wrinkled forehead, and her face tapered off into an emeoisted chin. Two-decayed front teeth added age to Nina's smile but could not dim its expression of humor, patience, and fortitude.
After offering me a chair, Nina had act down and taken in her lap her two-year-old baby. The other two small ones stood close to her chair. The three next in age stood around the hearth and over in the third chair in the room sat Nora, the oldest child.
"why, they are all girls," I observed presently.
"Yes, six girls, and the little one that died was a girl too," Nina said.
"You'll have your hands full rearing six children," I said, thinking what a fortunate thing for Nina that her child-bearing had started comparatively late and that it was now over.
"I was tryin' to make Nora a little print to wear to school," Nina said. "The child don't have no clothes atall."
"What grade are you in, Nora?" asked.
"Seventh," Nora replied.
"She's always done well in school, Nina said.
"She's not quite thirteen yet. She come along exactly
one year after me and Jim was married. She was born
on my nineteenth birthday."
Even after I had added nineteen and thirteen at least three times it was hard for me to believe that Nina was only thirty-two. Seven children in thirteen years and she was only thirty-two. I was wondering if the Boone family was yet complete when Nina said, "My Ma had thirteen children."
The children were very quiet in the room as they stood and looked at me. Some of them had bright red hair and the others had brown hair like their mother. All of them had bright blue eyes. They wore patched clothes, all of them, but they were dirty only with that day's dirt. Their patched clothes had been clean when the day began. The four-year old had rust-colored patch shaped like e hatchet on her faded yellow print. It spread ludicrously across her little stomach as she stood with her hands behind her back and looked at me out of solemn, beautiful eyes.
The children looked first at Nina and then at me as Nina told me a few things about her life.
Nina was born in Folk County on her father's small mountain farm. She went as far as the sixth grade in the country school near her home. There was always work to do and plenty of field work too. On two Sundays a month she went with her family to the community church and other than that there was very little diversion in her life. It was at church that she met Jim when she was sixteen and he was eighteen. Jim who had spent all of his life at a cotton mill was visiting his uncle near Nina's home. When she was eighteen and Jim twenty they married and Nina moved with Jim to the mill.
Eleven years ago they moved to Spencer mill. For the past eight years they have lived in the little house on the rim of Happy Hollow.
"But it don't seem like we can live here much longer," Nina said. "When the children start growin' up they won't be room enough for all of 'em in one room. Jim's spoke for another house when one gets empty. There's only one reason why I'd hate to leave down here. It's such good grasin' for my cow, and without a cow we couldn't feed the children. We've kept a cow all along and it's been a blessin'. The garden and the cow kept us goin' this past summer when the mill was shut down for five weeks. We never got behind with anything but the insurance. He got $7.54 unemployment money during that time and we never could understand why he didn't get more. He went in to Rutherfordton every week for awhile but he never got but that one check.
"I went to Pa's this summer and canned all I could. That helps out a lot when Wages is low. It's still over there but we hope to go after it tomorrow if he can borrow his brother's our. Once winter sets in we ain't likely to get over there. Then, they may be somethin' else on the place that will do to can if we get it before the frost damages it."
Nina stopped talking, and the children, restless after standing so still began to whisper among themselves. The four-year-old skipped across the room and leaned against her sister's chair. "I wish I had a dress like yourn," she said to Nora.
"Maybe Name can make you one out of the scraps," Nora said and smiled at the child.
"Are you gonna wear it to school tomorrow?" the child asked.
"She'll want to save it to near to Sunday School first," Nina said. "She don't never misc is Sunday," she continued, turning to me. "She says she wants to be a church worker if she can get enough education.
Like bein' a home missionary," she explained.
With attention focused on her, Nora's transparent skin turned rosy pink, She played confusedly with the fingers of the four-year old. Presently she had overcome her embarrassment enough to say, "We've got a awful pretty church."
I told her that I had seen the church that morning while walking over the mill village and I had observed particularly the pretty shrubbery around it.
"I think it's prettier inside than outside," she said.
All the children except Nora and the baby ran out on the small porch and left a feeling of emptiness in the bare-looking room There were the three chairs, the old machine, a rickety table and a bed.
"Sometimes I've wished it was so I could get a job, and Jim says he wouldn't want me to leave the children if I could," Nina said, "He don't think nobody would take the same care of 'em that I do. But it's all we can do to live on $13 a week. Sometimes he don't make that much. He says when they get older and more of 'em start to school he don't see how he can manage unless wages go up.
"Jim thinks if any man can get better wages for the poor man Roosevelt can. He says they ain't much Roosevelt can do by himself though. But you don't know how much good it does Jim to feel that somebody is tryin' to help us even if he don't get nothin' done. He's said to me more than once, 'Nina, that's a man with a heart big enough to want to help us that's never had much of a chance.'
"Jim wants all the children to go through high school but I don't know whether we can keep 'em in school that long or not.
"It a problem to send six children through school," I said.
An embarrassed expression passed quickly across Nina's face. At that moment the baby wiggled down from her lap and ran out on the porch to join the other children. It was then for the first time that I saw Nina was with child.
Wake Forest Cotton Mill
Wake Forest. N. C.
August 1, 1938
I. L. M.
BILL BRANCH
It was the baffled look in his eyes that I noticed first. He cupped his hand back of his ear as I talked to him and that made his eyes even stranger. He says he worked so long in the cardroom where the drone of wheels beat constantly in his ears that a roaring sound was set up in his head which has not stopped even now when he's out of the mill for good.
He does not want to be out of the mill for good, because he's only twenty-five years old and he has a family of three to support. Of course, if he could get work somewhere else he would prefer that because he believes the mill was fast ruining his health. But in all his life he has known no other work but the cotton mill until last winter when he worked for awhile on the WPA. He is waiting for the day when the WPA will take him on again. Fifteen dollars and a half a month means a lot to a man when he has a wife and two babies looking to him for a living. His mind is bewildered over the working of the unemployment compensation. He speaks of a letter mailed to him from Harry Hopkins in which he is told that he cannot secure work with the WPA until his compensation benefits have been exhausted. For three months he has not had work of any kind. During that time he has received $22 of unemployment compensation out of his accumulated portion of $72.94. For seven weeks he has not received a check. He caught a ride into Raleigh the other day and found his way to the Social Security offices. He says the best understanding he could get of the matter was that they just hadn't been able to get around to him yet. They promised to see to it that he draws some money soon. Some of the boys who went along with him asked those in charge if they might be allowed to give back to the government their share of the unemployment compensation so there would be one less obstacle blocking them from WPA jobs.
This man whose eyes express the confusion within him is Bill Branch. Bill married Helen wise three years ago. A few months before, his brother, Henry, married Helen's sister, Jane. About two months ago both Helen and Jane had their second babies. They live together now, the eight of them, in a six-room house, and manage to supplement their sacks of relief groceries with a little credit secured at the local store. The relief people come out from Raleigh about once a month and bring groceries which last for a little more than a week. Bill Branch tells you that he appreciates anything they can give him now when he is unable to help himself, but he cannot live always in such a manner. He wants out of life just a chance to make e decent living for himself and family. By that he means: enough food, a few clothes, a house to live in which does not leak, proper medical care, and a dollar or two for amusement now and then. These things which seem simple enough are so far removed from him now that he is doubtful whether he will ever have them. He says he sees nothing in store for him and he feels at twenty-five that the best of his life is over.
The years behind him were not replete with blessings. He was one of six children and his parents were never able to get along. He thinks that if he had attended school regularly he'd be better able to manage today. Once a week when wash day came around he had to stay out to help his mother. There were numerous other occasions when his help at home was required. Those days out of school seemed always to keep him behind his class. He speaks with pride of his wife's diploma. She got it when she finished the seventh grade. She did not stop school until she was ready for the ninth. Bill, trying to make a little joke, says she has more sense than he. Momentarily the confused look leaves his eyes.
I sat for awhile the other day with Bill and Helen in their best room which contains a bed, a cradle, a dresser, two good rockers, and two straight chairs. Helen nursed her fat, two-months old baby whose little body is tanned to a golden brown from the sun baths his mother gives him each day. She wore her dirty pink dress over the domestic gown in which she'd slept the night before. Her two children were dressed in sunsuits freshly ironed that morning.
"These two are all I want," Helen said, nodding her head to include both her children. "It seems to me the world's too full of people already or there wouldn't be so many out of jobs. Big families don't belong in this changing world."
"Helen's right," Bill agreed. "Folks caint half do with big families any more, What do you think's goin' to become of all the mill people that the mills don't need no longer?" he asked, and then proceeded to answer his own question. "The way I see it, it looks like some of us that caint get mill work's got to try somethin' new. We got to go out and find another life. I wish I could get on one of these resettlement projects they talk about in the papers. I don't know nothin' about farming but I'd be willin' to try."
As he talked he extracted from his pocket a bill fold in which he keeps his Social Security and WPA cards. Nervously he unfolded it and folded it again. Inside, there was a smiling picture of Franklin Roosevelt. Once Bill Branch looked hard at the picture, and put the bill fold again in his pocket.
"They's some of us that don't know ways of helpin' our own selves, I reckin," he spoke slowly, searching for words to make me understand the thoughts that tormented him. "And they don't seem to be anybody around here to take any interest in us. That sounds like complaining, don't it, but I don't mean fer it to. We just live here, some of us half-starvin' and the folks outside don't seem to care. They's one man not far from here that takes a interest in us pore class of folks but outside of him I don't know another.
"The man I'm speakin' of is Dr. Timberlake. I belonged to his list before I lost my job but naturally I caint pay nothing now. That don't make no difference with him, and anytime I'd call him, night or day, he'd come right on. When babies are born, that don't go in on the money we pay every week. He never charged but twenty dollars for that last one though and others here in town charge thirty-five. We've never paid the twenty yet, and the other day when I mentioned to him I still didn't have no work he said, 'Don't worry yourself about that bill. Even if you offered to pay me some on it, I wouldn't take the money unless I knowed you had more for food. Yes, I reckin he's the only one about that really likes us as folks."
"Does the superintendent try whenever possible to give work to at least one member of a family?" I asked him.
"Well, no'm, not always," Bill Branch replied, slowly, "He's a young man, likeable enough, but I reckin he ain't never had a day of actual want in his life. He sorter leaves things to the overseers and they take care of they kinfolks first and then they friends. Right down there in that house they's five workin' in the mill. This superintendent ain't been here but two year. He's got to have time like anybody else to study and learn. Maybe things'll be some better when he ketches on. I've went to him a time or two and told him I was a man with a family and I've got to have work. He's polite to me but every time he puts me off."
"They listened to you one time," Helen said, smiling a little.
"You mean about covering the house?" Bill asked. Turning to me be explained "We was livin' in two rooms of another house when that first baby was born. (It was a rainy spell and I aint misrepresentin' none to you when I say the water stood in puddles ankle-deep about her bed. I had out every bucket and pan we owned but they couldn't ketch it all. I looked at Helen and that little baby and I wondered if they could live in such conditions. I went for the president of the mill -- his office is right up there in the company building -- and I 'sisted on him coming to the house. When he got there, he took one look and he said, 'Well, I'll swear.' Then he turned around and left. The carpenters come right away. They covered this house and several more. They was aimin' to cover all on the hill, I reckin, but when the first shift of the cardroom struck over their wages bein' out from $14 to $9 the president stopped the carpenters from work. The rest of the houses aint been covered yet. This one we are in now leaks mighty bad."
"Your brother doesn't have any sort of work either?" I asked in a little while.
"No'm, nothin' atall. He's in the same fix I am about the WPA. The government's still holding some of his Social Security. Or rather, he's got more to draw that he haven't been able to draw yet. He's not at home now but his wife's in there. She'd be pleased to see you if you care to go in."
I went into the center of the three shabby rooms-in-a-row being used by Jane Branch and her husband. Jane is frailer-looking than Helen and her features are more delicate.
Jane did not go further than the fourth grade because as the oldest of the Wise children she had to stop school and keep house when her mother went into the mill. At eighteen she married, and for a while both she and her husband worked. Her money went to meet the installments on the three-piece bedroom suite and the kitchen cabinet. Seven dollars of the bill remains to be paid, and she hopes surely the dealer will not take the furniture away from her knowing that she is willing to pay the balance but cannot until her husband gets a job. Did I think they would do such a thing? she wanted to know. She and Henry were getting along well a year ago. Henry was making eleven dollars and she was making nine. They'd saved over a hundred dollars and would have had some money to carry them through the bitter year just past but the oldest child, then a year old, developed a serious illness which almost paralyzed his arm. One doctor said it was infantile paralysis and others said it was a strained nerve. Hospital expenses for him reached well beyond their savings.
She worries a great deal over the child's arm though it seems to get a little stronger all the time. Her greatest problem right now is to encourage her husband when there's no hope in her own heart. How they will live through the winter she does not know, but she tries hard to conceal her fear from Henry. He says life is not worth anything to him now because he doesn't feel that he'll ever have a regular job again. Jane wouldn't mind now going to the Relief, but she says it takes so long to get even a little food. It's so hard for her to explain her needs to those in charge that she has stopped altogether asking for clothes for her children. About once a month she, like the other Branches, gets the sack of groceries which lasts about a week. How they shall obtain coal for the winter is a question which gives her much concern. If Henry does get straightened out on his social security and gets on the WPA how can they buy coal if he makes only $15 a month as he did last winter, she wanted to know.
I left Jane holding her small baby and smiling just a little. In the front room on the other side of the house Bill Branch was still sitting where he was when I left the room. The baffled look was still in his eyes.
Asheville Cotton Mill Asheville, N. C.
August 17, 1938
I. L. M
IMA BUCKNER
It was late Saturday afternoon, a heavy fog hung over Factory Hill. Ima Buckner was deeply worried and the dreary day added to her depression. Her husband, Ned, fifty-five, withered and toothless, set on the porch with his hands folded together and his head bowed.
Right up hill from Ima's house her mother and unmarried sister live. A few feet below her in & little house on & washed-out lot her brother, Dan, his wife and four children live. I had just accepted Ned's invitation to seat myself in one of the two chairs on the porch when Ima, accompanied by her sister, returned from her mother's house. Her brother came over from his house and stood in the narrow rut of a yard, shifting from one foot to the other.
"I just have to go off now and agin fur a cryin' spell," Ima said to me as she flopped down on the steps and covered her thin, yellow face with bar hands.
"Are you in trouble?" I asked.
"My daughter was operated on Thursday and she's bed off. Today's the first day she's begged me not to leave her and I'm afraid she's uneasy about herself."
"Is she married?" I inquired.
"Mom, and I hope she won't never be now. She's thirty-four and she aint been right well since she was fourteen. That gym they made her take at school was always against her."
"You oughtner let her took it," Dan said gruffly.
"I couldn't help it," lma defended herself.
"They couldner made her. It aint the law," Dan continued.
"I don't understand nothin' about the law," Ima said and burst into tears again. "I don't even understand about them work benefits. We have to sign up every Thursday, you know, and I had to go to the City Hall not more'n a hour after Mamie come off the operation' table. They close at half past four and if you aint there on the day set for you you don't get nothin'. My hand was so trembly hit wouldn't hold a pen and my boy had to sign for me. The girl up there talked so hard to me." Ima's sniffling changed to heavy sobbing.
"What made her talk like that?" Dan asked belligerently and then proceeded to answer his own question. Cause she was settin' behind a desk gettin' good money to hand us out little checks."
"Do you reckin she can keep me from gettin' my money just because I answered her back?" Ima asked as she turned toward me. Before I could speak, Dan was answering her question for her.
"Course they caint," he said. "Taint the law. Hit aint theirs to give or to take away. Hit belongs to us and we've got a right to it. Uncle Sam started this; now let him finish it. They got to pay. I
signed up sixteen times before I got a cent of mine durin' them weeks last winter when I was jest agettin' two days a week in the mill. Hit's almost worth it to get it but I'll have mine even if I caint get there by half past four of e Thursday to sign for it. They say since I get off work at 4 o'clock I oughter be there on time. They think I'll come on jest like I work in the mill but I aint sdoin' it. I'm gonna bathe, and shave, and brush a little cotton off me before I go up there to see them people that stay dressed in good clothes all the time. How's a fellow like me goin' to pay his bus fare, too? 'Gin I walk from here to the City Hall hit's past 4:30. Why caint they let me sign up on days when I aint aworkin'? They's plenty of them days now, plenty of 'em."
Ima's mind was no longer on her unemployment compensation. She was thinking of her sick daughter in Mission Hospital. When a tiny chicken perched itself up on the edge of a pasteboard box near the end of the porch, she said, Thems her chickens. She's the cresiest thing I ever seen about little biddies. She was in bed five weeks before she went to the hospital and I'd spread a cover over the bed and put them chickens on it for her to see. She's got a hen here that her feller give her when it was nothin' but a biddy. If anything happens to Mamie I'll keep that hen as long as it lives."
When Ima had gained control of herself again she continued, "I've got Mamie's picture in there on the . . piano if you'd care to see it. She's the prettiest thing and as good a girl as ever lived."
I followed Ima through her comfortably equipped kitchen which would have been clean except for the sooty walls, through a fairly comfortable bedroom and into the parlor. "This is Mamie's piano," she said with pride. "She bought it herself outs the money she made in the mill, That radio belongs to my son, Harry. My three children have shorely worked hard to have things like other folks. You ought to see the bedroom suite them two girls has got upstairs. And Mamie's got a whole cedar chest full of fancy work. Here's her picture. Aint she sweet-lookin'?"
"Both of your daughters are nice looking," I said, glanoing from Mamie's picture to the one still on the piano. "Henrietta's a fine girl too," Ima said proudly. "They both stayed in school till they finished the ninth grade. Both got certificates from Bible school, too, and that gives 'em the right to do any kind of church work. They are Sunday School teachers down in the Patton Ave. Baptist Church."
"You've never had but three children?" I asked presently.
"Jest three. After the boy was born I was in such shape that a year later I had to go to the hospital and have everything took out. The doctors told me not to go back to the mill for six months after that operation. In two months time I was at work agin. I was inspector in the cloth room then and none knowed about a certain kind of cloth but me. The mill got orders for it and the superintendent asked me if I couldn't come back. He sent his car right up to my door for me and I went I've spent many a day down there in that mill so sick I could hardly go."
"How many of your family are working now?" I asked.
"Ned, and Henrietta, and Jim get three days apiece a week. I was workin' up to last December but I fell and broke my arm, We was managing fairly well till them heavy doctor's bills come on us. My broke gym cost a sight but it wasn't a beginnin' to what Mamie's sickness will cost.
"I doubt if they'll ever give me work agin. They's so many people tryin' to get a place in the mills now. Since we've got the stretch-out and short time too, the mill don't need all of us no way. You seen Ned settin' out there on the porch and lookin' plumb wore out?" she asked. Then as if she were afraid someone else might hear her Ima came nearer and began speaking again but in lowered tones. "He's doin' two men's jobs now and hit'll kill him before long. He caint hold up under it at his age and him about used up from workin' since he was a child. Me and him's spent most of our lives down there in that mill."
It was not hard to believe as she stood there that most of her life had been spent toiling. Her drab grey hair formed a fitting frame for her withered face. Her eyes, still struggling, looked wearily out of their sunken sockets. The loose pink dress she wore wrapped in folds about her fleshless body.
"A body don't know whether Mamie'll ever be able to take care of herself agin,"Ima said as she led the way back to the porch. "And I'm so anxious for my children to have things like other folks."
Ima's sister had left but Dan was still standing out in the yard. Dan's two oldest children sat on the doorsteps and held boxes of 5 blocks of candy in their laps. The pale twelve-year old girl looked up and said, "We make thirty-five cent apiece s week sellin' candy, and I get a dollar and five cent a week for stayin' with Mrs. Johnson while her husband works on night shift.
"Hit's almost as much as I make," Dan said, laughing bitterly.
"Do you reck in they'll keep me outs my work benefited Ima asked, turning toward me.
"I'm sure you'll get it if your work record meets the requirements of the law," I replied.
"Course they caint keep you from getting' it," Dan said stoutly, "Taint the law to keep it from you."
A foggy silence fell over the crowd. Ima looked uneasily at her brother and he dropped his head, abashed. Dan's wife came out of her door and joined her husband where he stood in the yard. Everything about her suggested tuberculosis in its latter stages. She looked at her daughter and said, "Reckin you'll git your thirty-five cent this week?"
"I think I'll finish sellin' my box this evenin', "the child answered.
Ned who had not spoken since he invited me in, looked up at me with a toothless smile as I got up to leave. "Come back agin, m'am," he said and lapsed again into weary silence.
I turned to lma and expressed my hopes for her daughter's quick recovery. Tears spreng to her eyes and her voice was unsteady as she asked me to come again. All of them watched me in silence as I went down the path and away from Factory Hill.
Asheville Cotton Mill
Asheville, N. C.
August 12, 1938
I. L. M.
LUCILLE HICKS
Lucille Hicks sat on her porch one hot afternoon last week dressed in a drab black winter dress which "Charity" had donated. She held in her arms her year-old baby who was clothed in a single scarlet garment fashioned from a rayon remnant. She said, "Of a evenin' they don't seem to be nothin' to do but set and wait, and a body don't half know what he's waitin' for."
She looked old when she said that, old with listless age. Her shoulders humped into a weary curve which that refused to accept harmoniously the stringy lines of her leathery neck. Her smile which was fashioned around three snags of what were once front teeth tended only to add more age. Once or twice a glint of humor edged into her spiritless eyes and gave momentary youth to her ugly face.
For the thirty years of her life Lucille has lived here and there in the ugly spots of Asheville, being driven from one to the other by economic necessity, and never staying in any particular place long enough to plant a root which would give her the feeling of being at home. The wretched-looking house on Factory Hill in which she now lives is beginning to stand as home in her mind for she has been there three years.
Lucille was born in the hollow across from Factory Hill in that section where live railroad workman, odds and ends jobmen, and lower-paid city workers such as incinerator operators and garbage removers. Her father who at one time was a railroad switchman lost an arm, and became a news butcher on the train. Despite the responsibility of eleven children he managed to save enough to start payments on a small place in Grace, a suburb of Asheville. There he set up a meat market and probably would have finished paying for his property had it not been for his wife's illness which ended in hospital and doctor's bills. After the place was lost, Lucille's family moved back to the vicinity of factory Hill.
When Lucille was nineteen she married Tom Hicks who was then working at the Asheville incinerator. Before and for some time after she was married, Lucille worked at the Swannanoa Laundry. "I'd come of a night," she says," feelin' like my arms was clean loose from the sockets. I worked from sun-up to sun-down pushin' a heavy iron for six dollars a week. Law, my old back aches yet when I think about it."
After Tom lost his job at the incinerator he bought an old truck and peddled coal. That led him to what Lucille calls the "grit line." For months they lived on Relief and Lucille says of that experience "Hit was each a helpless feelin' to have to eat pintos all the time when that was the one kind of bean you couldn't stand. How good it was when they started givin' money instead of rations and you could go to the store and buy the sort of beans that pleased you."
Three years ago Tom secured a part-time job as watchman at the Asheville Cotton Mill. He now makes $9.20 a week. Out of that Lucille buys food and a few clothes for her family of six, and makes payments on her washing machine. Her washing and sewing machines are the two possessions she treasures most. With the aid of the sewing machine she can make a garment for any of her four children out of a ten or fifteen-cent remnant of cloth. With the washing machine she can now strive and in a small measure succeed in keeping the Factory Hill dirt washed out of the few clothes she makes for them.
Lucille does not have many possessions. There are three old beds, three or four rickety chairs, one dresser, a crude eating table, and a stove in her house, She has brightened one corner of her best room by draping it with pink paper roping. Over the top of the door of the same room she has tacked a twelve-inch ruffle of gaily-colored cretonne.
Lucille went as far as the fifth grade in school but recording to her own estimate all she knows is a little readin' and writin'. "And, she continues, laughing, "from the looks of things all I need to know is how to pin on hippings. I told Tom when this last baby was born I hoped the stork would try to walk away from Factory Hill because I knowed he'd fall and maybe he'd break his wing. Maybe that would put t and to his trips to our house."
Already Louise is wondering what will become of the four children she has if jobs continue to get harder and harder to find. "It seems like a body is raiain' his younguns for starvation," she says. "But pore folks aint never had it easy and I don't reckin they ever will. They aint been no time in my life when livin' wasn't hard. Hit seems like sometimes now we caint live on what Tom makes but when I get to thinkin' of them pinto beans, that $9.20 a week seems like a sight of money."
She rocks on in the creaky old swing; while her children play out in the cindered path before her door.
715 15th St. West Durham, N. C. September 14, 1938
I. L. M.
THE JACKSON FAMILY
The last of the summer petunias lent a splash of bright color to the small, smoothly-mown yard of No. 715, 15th St. On the porch, a lazy black cat curled himself against the leather cushion of the porch glider. The front door stood ajar and through it a mild breeze carried the refreshing coolness of an early September day into the living room to the right of the small entrance hall. The fresh scrim curtains at the windows stirred lightly with now and then a flurry when a cross current brought a stronger and chillier breeze into the room.
The day was Saturday of September, 1938. It was a good day of a good year for James Jackson. The day was good because only that morning he had made the last payment on his eighteen-months old Plymouth oar. The year was good because in January he had been made second hand in the spinning room at $27.50 a week. The twelve percent cut which came in July reduced his wage to a little less than $25 but that left enough for him to live on comfortably. His wife worked in the mill until two months ago and made $15 a week.
They have been able to save for their first child which will arrive within the next month.
James is thirty-two and his straight, well-built body, clear complexion and bright eyes stand as proof of the good health he has always enjoyed. He and his wife now share their four-room house with his mother and his eighteen-year old brother, clarence. The young Jacksons and Mrs. Jackson occupy the two bedrooms and clarence sleeps on a cot in the room which is used as a combination of kitchen and dining room. This three purpose room has in it no space for storing the canned fruits and vegetables which the elder Mrs. Jackson prepared during the summer. Consequently the jars have been arranged in neat rows across the corner near the fireplace in the living room and just opposite the upright piano. There are two hundred jars of beans, tomatoes, corn, peaches, pickles, and preserves. All the vegetables were gathered from the Jackson garden just back of the house.
James Jackson sat in his living room on this Saturday in September and discussed the company for which he works. "I don't know of a better company to work for," he declared. "The officials here have the worker's interests at heart. They've furnished as with a fine Auditorium where a person can find free amusement if he wants to. They order coal in big lots and sell it to us without profit for $6.50 a ton. They keep the houses in good repair and rent them to us for almost nothing. I pay $1.50 a week for my four rooms, bath room, and garage. If I didn't live in a company house I'd have to pay $5 a week for a house not kept in as good condition as this.
"There are very few people working in the mill who make less than $12 a week when they work full time. Some of the help's sent out now and then as much as a day out of a week to rest but never more than that. We make standard goods -- sheets and pillow cases, you know -- and we generally have orders on hand all the time.
"I feel like people living here at this mill have as good or better chance for a decent living as most people working in stores, in offices, and such places where they don't make any more than we do and have a sight more house rent to pay.
"Of course the company don't have enough houses for all its help. There's some working in the mills here that's paying $20 a month for rent because they caint get a company house. But the majority of us has the advantage over other working people when it comes to rent."
There was about James Jackson a spirit of well being as he talked of the company and of his own life. It seemed to spring from his conviction that he had worked for what he had gotten and had gotten what he had worked for.
James, one of eight children, was born on his father's small farm in Sampson County and lived there until he was ten years old. By that time his father, who had quit farming for railroad work a few years earlier, had decided that a steady wage was better than the uncertainties of farm production and farm prices. He moved his family first to Erwin Cotton Mill at Erwin, then to the East Durham Mill, and later to the West Durham Mill where James still lives. The elder Jackson died a year after his youngest child, Clarence, was born. Up to that time all the children of school age had been able to remain in school. James completed the eighth grade after which he began a course in bookkeeping. Convinced that he was not suited to that type of work he quit the course and went into the spinning room at the age of fifteen. There he has remained and availed himself of his opportunities to learn all he could about his work. He has attended a number of the textile courses offered in night school by the mill officials and he completed a correspondence course in textile work from the International Correspondence schools.
Six years after the elder Jackson's death his widow decided to move out into the country, but not too far for her children to drive into Durham for their work. She bought on time-payment a home and six acres at Bragtown, about five miles out, and here three of her children not yet old enough to work in the mill raised truck produce. The children who worked in town took the vegetables and sold them to certain stores which could handle ell the small farm could supply.
After eight years the farm was paid for and the younger members of the family had secured work in the mill Mrs. Jackson rented her farm and moved back to the mill village. Today all of her children except Clarence are married, and half of them live at the mill while the others live in the country.
Clarence who is now in the tenth grade has supported himself by working in the mill since he was fifteen. He quit school after finishing the ninth grade and after a lapse of three years he has decided to finish high school. He is one of the sixty-five students attending the Durham High School Co-operative Class, a class organized for working boys ambitious to complete their high school training. It is conducted so as to fit in with the working schedule of all of its members. Clarence who works in the mill from 3:30 in the afternoon until 12 at night attends classes in the morning from 9 o'clock until 12. "It's pretty hard," he says, "but I'm going to stick it through this year and two more. After that, I don't know what I'll do, but at least I won't be turned down for a job just because I don't have a high school education, I may stay right on in the mill and work up like James. There's not many jobs for the working man that pays more than $25 a week.
"And they don't come by just wishing for 'em" James told his brother, that Saturday he'd finished paying for his car.
Reservoir St.
East Durham, N. C.
September 7, 1938
1. L. M.
HANNIE RUTH PARKS
Her eyes are weary and underlined with dark, pouchy circles. There is a grave passivity about her face which brings up thoughts of age. Her stomach bulges as with middle-age neglect while she hunches over in her chair and rocks in her lap her pale, scrawny, nine-months old baby. In the summertime her bare feet are usually grimy with sand. She loves the feel of the rough earth against her feet and several times a day she walks slowly up the sanded street to her mother's house. She walks with the stodgy heaviness of an old woman but she is only seventeen.
When she talks to a stranger her manner is that of an undeveloped and untaught child. It is then that one notices that she is not old. Occasionally, though, she makes a statement with a knowledge born of poverty which makes her seem again much older than she really is.
Nannie Ruth married mill Parks a few-months before she was fifteen Mill was thirty-two. He was born in Tennessee in a section so isolated that it had no schools. Will has never learned to write his name. He worked for awhile at a foundry in Chattanooze and later went to Columbus, Georgia, and secured work in cotton mill. His wanderings led him to Durham, and there he met Nannie Ruth soon after she had started to work in the mill.
Nannie Ruth says it was no trouble for her to start keeping house for herself because she'd been looking after the things at home since she was twelve she had finished the sixth grade and meant to go further with her schooling" but her father took the "wonder fever" and left her mother to support the five children. Her mother went into the mill and Nannie Ruth had to stay at home to Keep house and care for the younger children. For two years Nannie Ruth's father wandered about from place to place and then suddenly he decided to come back home. Nannie Ruth was fourteen then and she had just wet will She was old enough to work in the mil but after e few months at her job she decided she would never like it. That was one reason she was so glad when will asked her to marry him. "Ma raised no objections," she says, "because she thought will would make me livin' Besides, will was a steady sort of person and she said she wanted her girls to marry man who wouldn't up and leave them without any cause."
There wasn't a vacant house in the mill village for Nannie Ruth and will so they rented a room from a young couple who have no children. In that room where they cook and eat;and sleep Nannie Ruth's baby was born a year later. They've crowded e baby bed in there with the big bed, the dresser, the eating table, the oil stove, and the chairs.
"Age don't make no difference; it's what you get and I've got a fairly good livin'" Nannie Ruth says as she site and looks at her things. "It's better than I had at home anyhow. If Will gets full time he draws $13 a week because he's a loom fixer. Course, he didn't get but one day last week, but you don't never know when the mill'll get more orders. The baby don't cost much yet, just a little for her Carnation milk. My milk didn't agree with her and I put her on owned milk. She never would take a bottle so I just give it to her out of a cup.
The most money we spend for amusements is on somethin' to read. Will buys me love story magazines and he gets Westerns for himself. I read his to him of a night and durin' the evenin " while I'm settin' here holdin' the baby I readay own."
It is not of her own living that Nannie Ruth has any concern at present because she and will still have a few dollars, and, as she says, the mill might give mill more than one night of work this week she does feel concerned over her mother' and the children. Three of them are of school age now and today when they started to school there wasn't a nickel in the house to buy a notebook Her father who hasn't had a day's work in two weeks left home yesterday in search of a job. Meanwhile his wife and four children stay at home and Wait.
"They've provided school and they've made laws for forcin' poor children to go to'em," Nannie Ruth says while her face takes on age, "but they've got; to do more figurin' on how folks on get pencils and tablets and clothes for their children when they've got no job and no money."
1923 Pettigrew St.
West Durham, N. C.
July 19, 1938
I. L. M.
THE RENNS
Wesley Renn lives in the mill village in one of the better houses which has a comfortable stretch of lawn shaded by two or three trees. He likes to sit in his swing on the porch in the springtime and watch day by day as the tree buds grow into leaves and the grass shoots up into a newer, pleasanter green. His first twenty-one years were spent in the country and the sight of growing things still awakens in him an urge to live again on the farm. He says' that he will probably die in a mill village but at heart he'll always be a farmer.
The farm was sparing in the things which it gave to Wesley Renn. His father was a renter with nine children and he was never able to do the things he wanted to do for his children. To Wesley he gave four sessions of school: the first, one and one-half months for which the teacher was paid a dollar a month; the second, two months at the same price; the third and fourth, two months each year in a free school.
The elder Renn was not without ambition for his children. He cherished the hope that each of his five sons might one day own some of the acres which they had helped him cultivate. Long years of labor had taught him that if they did fulfill this hope the money with which they bought the land would not be made on the other man's land. When in 1899 cotton went to four cents after what had been an extremely unfavorable growing season in his vicinity, Mr. Renn, the elder, decided definitely that he would take his family from the farm into town where they might get work in a cotton mill.
At that time Wesley Renn was the oldest child at home. The three older boys had married and one was still a tenant farmer and two had found work in cotton mills. Wesley loved the country and was unwilling to leave it. In a few months after fall harvest he would be twenty-one, and, as he expresses it, his own free man. Thereafter, he would be no longer answerable to his father for his wage, and he could work where he chose. In an effort to keep his father on the farm Wesley offered to give him another year's work but the elder Renn was firmly convinced that farming for the other fellow had more drawbacks than advantages.
The Renns were living on one of the many farms belonging to David Ritchie. The quantity of cotton produced for Ritchie by his tenants was such that he needed a gin to take care of his own crops. In the fall of 1899 he was without a gin operator and he offered the job to Wesley who had proven himself a good steady worker and a man who got along with Negroes. Wesley says, "That offer come like a shining light because I'd never before had such a chance to make so much cash money in so short a time." His father's elation at his success almost matched his own. When Mr. Ritchie came to the field where the Renns were picking cotton and made his offer, the elder Renn turned to his son and said, "You don't have to stop and think fer a minute, Wesley. Me and the children'll double up on the hours and get the cotton out without your help and you can have as your own all you make." So for three months before taking a job in the cotton mill Wesley Renn operated his landlord's cotton gin at eleven dollars a month.
The Renns moved into Henderson but they did not go into a mill house. The elder Renn, who had lived in poor and unattractive houses all his life, still had a kind of pride which made him strive to keep his family from being classified as "cotton mill people." He found a small house on an out-of-the-way street and from there his children went into the mill. Mr. Renn had some ability as a carpenter and secured a job with a contractor at seventy-five cents a day.
With money from his job as gin operator still in his pockets, Wesley Renn was enabled to make a choice of the kind of mill work he wished to do. Instead of immediately taking a low wage job, he entered the weave room and worked there for four weeks learning his trade without receiving any pay. During the next four weeks he ran two looms at sixty cents a day. He increased his capacity to four looms for which he received one dollar and twenty cents a day. He continued in the weave room until 1902 when it closed down. Wesley was then transferred to another department of the mill, but his work-load there was so heavy he found it impossible to keep up.
He left Henderson and went to a small rural cotton mill at Falls. There he stayed for seven years and there at the age of twenty-five he married Sadie Jones. Sadie was inclined toward frailness. Her father, a tenant farmer, died when Sadie was twelve years old, leaving his wife with four small girls of whom Sadie was the oldest. Unable to eke out a living on the farm Mrs. Jones moved with her children to the mill.
Wesley now frequently refers to the insanitary conditions of the mills in the period when Sadie first entered them. "It's hard to believe," he says, "but in them days along about Christmas time the yard men would come in the mill with their shovels and actually scrape up piles of filth where the help had spit all the year long and no attention at all being paid to it. Yessir, plenty of cotton mill folks had T B's in them days and no wonder." He may then look at Sadie who sometimes sits on the porch with him while he is waiting for the mill whistle to summon him to work. He wants her to join him in support of the statement he has just made, and in a tired sort of way she nods her head in agreement.
Sadie has never worked in the mill since her marriage but she has borne eight children. After the birth of her second child her health became worse, and since then there have been very few-months when she has not received medical treatment.
At Falls Mills Wesley became a loom fixer and such a proficient one that the Rosemary mills offered him a little higher wage--an offer which he immediately took. While he was at Falls, his mother-in-law had died and her three unmarried daughters had moved in with him and his family. Wesley did well with his new job but his three sisters-in-law were unable to do the Jack Hart weaving, the system then being used at Rosemary. Consequently the family had to move after a short stay of seven weeks and this time they went to East Durham. Wesley moved several more times during the next few years, each time with the expectation of higher wages. He knows now that many of the moves were not wise, but in those days he was grabbing at any chance that promised a little more money. He still had visions of buying a little farm, but at no place had he found an opportunity for laying aside a penny.
Wesley was ambitious also that his younger brother. Joe should find an occupation more respectable than mill work. In 1912 he persuaded Joe to go to Atlanta for an eight weeks' barber's course. Joe's life in the mill had started so early that he had even less schooling than Wesley. When he returned from Atlanta he made arrangements with a retired school teacher for lessons in reading, writing, and simple arithmetic. In time he bought a shop of his own and had sufficient knowledge of arithmetic to keep his accounts.
In 1917, without the money he had hoped to have but with a determination to try farming again, Wesley returned to his father's old landlord, and arranged for farming on halves. He broke even in 1917, but the year 1918 brought him more success than he had ever known. The price of tobacco had soared far beyond anything he had ever dreamed of and his crop had given him a greater yield than he would ordinarily expect in two average years. That year his landlord marketed five thousand dollars worth of tobacco and half of that money was Wesley's. When he got through paying the merchant who had furnished him on the basis of sales price plus twenty percent carrying charge, he still had a neat sum left. As another step toward land ownership he bought mules and farm equipment and made new arrangements with his landlord. This time he would receive three-fourths of what he produced.
That year Mr. Ritchie joined the Tobacco Cooperative and when the tobacco was marketed Wesley was given a check for one-third of the amount coming to him. He says he is still waiting for the balance. The whole amount would have been small because of a great drop in tobacco prices. Wesley sold his stock, paid up his debts, and had enough left to move his family back to the mill. Since then he has accepted what seems to him to be his inevitable lot, that the remainder of his life will be spent at the mill.
Of the eight children three are now married and two are working in the mill. The other three are in school and the Renns hope to see them finish high school. The five oldest children received on the average a sixth grade education.
The children are proud of their home, and the two who are working spend a good part of their wages in buying new furniture on the installment plan. They are particularly proud of their living room with its big-flowered rug, its over-stuffed furniture, its many gaudy dolls, and its numerous arrangements of artificial flowers. It is just within the past three years that they have had a living room at all. Across the narrow hall is Sadie's bedroom which is quiet and restful. Her husband and her children have bought for her a good bedroom suite and they have added small comforts which made it a satisfying place for Sadie. She is unable to sit up for more than a few hours at a time and her children gather around in the room as she lies on the bed, each trying in some small way to encourage her into believing that she will soon be well. On such occasions various members of the family sit around reading books from the village library. The fifteen-year-old boy prefers murder stories with such titles as "The Skull Murder Case" and the eleven year old daughter is still intrigued with the adventures of the Bobbsey Twins. Wesley is obviously well pleased when he sees his children with books in their hands, because to him a love of reading, selective or not, is e mark of respectability. Sadie, too, is likely to add a tired smile when one of her children becomes so absorbed in a book that he pays no attention to some question addressed to him.
Wesley wants Sadie to go to Duke Hospital and stay there for treatment but she has a fear of hospitals which she is unable to overcome. Out of his good wage of twenty-six dollars a week he is saving a sum from each pay day so that he may be able to provide the care which any adverse change in his wife's health might require.
Kast Durham Cotton Mill
East Durham, N.C.
August 23, 1938
I.L.M.
FOUR FAMILIES ON RESERVOIR STREET
Reservoir Street leads into the village where live the people who work in the East Durham Cotton Mill. In the first three houses on the east side of the street four families make their homes. Of the sixteen people comprising these families only four are willing to spend the remainder of their lives in a mill village. Two of the dissatisfied ones have endeavored to prepare themselves for work outside the mill. One girl of sixteen is struggling over almost insuperable difficulties to equip herself as a stenographer. One man took a part of a correspondence course in architecture during a few months last year.
The man is Arthur Hinson. He lives with his nineteen-year-old wife, Mae, in one half of the first house on Reservoir Street. Three years ago Arthur had a thousand dollars. He was the successful contestant in the Raleigh Walkathon. As he tread circle into circle around the Walkathon floor he often sang into the microphone such numbers as "They Cut Down the Old Pine Tree," "Mountain Music," and "Birmingham Jail." Arthur became a hero among a growing circle of friends. In less than a year his thousand dollars was gone. "He didn't have a cent of it when I met him," Mae says. "We've been married a year now and they's been many ways we could of used it. He spent a sight of it foolish because he drank right bad before he was married," she admits. "But he helped his family out some, too. They was ten of them and only him and his papa working."
To begin housekeeping the Hinsons bought nearly $300 worth of furniture on the installment plan. They made a down payment of twenty-five dollars and now make weekly payments of three dollars. The three-piece modernistic bedroom suite cost $79 and the five-burner oilstove cost $80. For the kitchen cabinet' which is Mae's particular pride, the Hinsons paid $60. The breakfast room suite of fancy design and inferior wood cost $35. If the installments are met regularly for the next six months the furniture will be entirely paid for.
Arthur is ambitious to get along in the world and he has tried various schemes of self-promotion. Over a year ago he signed up with the International Correspondence School of Scranton, Pennsylvania for the course in architecture. When his wage was reduced and his time out he could not keep up the payments and the course was discontinued. He still owes $107 of the $200 fee. He receives letters regularly reminding him of his obligation.
Arthur wants to use the knowledge he acquired from his course in the carpentry trade. Mae says that he has tried on two or three occasions to get himself fired from his mill job in order that he might be eligible for a carpenter's job on the WPA. He hates the mill, particularly since his work has been almost doubled and his wages out. He is considered the best doffer in the mill and the superintendent keeps him on. When he gets full-time work he makes $12 a week. During the past winter and spring he did not average over eight dollars a week. Arthur hopes to supplement his wage this winter by taking orders for men's and women's suits and raincoats.
Mae has great confidence in Arthur's abilities. She believes that once he breaks away from the mill he will be able to make a good living. She does not think the mill will ever offer him that advantage.
Mae has never had an adequate living herself but she takes pride in the fact that some of her relatives are property owners. She likes to tell you that her Grandfather Suggs owned a huckleberry farm in Johnson County and that Suggs Mill Pond took its name from her mother's people. She says that her grandfather's huckleberry farm was the largest in North Carolina but she is vague as to reasons shy her mother did not share in the money obtained from the property when it was sold after her grandmother's death. She likes to tell you, too, that she has a cousin in Fayetteville who owns a store and several barber shops.
Mae, the second child in a family of four children, was fix years old when her father died. "My mother shrubbed ditches and cleared new ground, working as hard as any man, for a dollar a day to raise us children," she will tell you. "Sometimes she picked beans by the day and then us children could help some. My oldest brother started to work in a fish market at Mt. Olive for e dollar and a half a week. We lived on what him and Mama made, getting', some clothes now and then from the Red Cross." Mt. Olive stands out in her mind as a place where the people are extremely kind because none of the children in school ever ridiculed her for wearing Red Cross clothes. It was there too that her mother was awarded several prizes for her well-kept yard.
Three years ago Mae's mother, worn out by many years of digging in the earth for a scanty subsistence, moved her family to Durham in hope of finding work in the cotton mill. For weeks she could secure no work of any kind except sack-tagging. Her family lived from hand to mouth on the small wages and what help they could get from the welfare department.
Mae got permission from the superintendent of the East Durham mill to learn to fill batteries. For two weeks she worked without a wage trying to do the job so well that the superintendent would hire her. "I was one happy soul," she says, "when on the third Monday morning the superintendent come around and said he was going to put me to work." A month later her mother also secured a job in the mill.
Mae worked for only a few weeks after she was married. Her health has never been good and it became worse after she went in the mill. While she was working she smoked a package of cigarettes daily. Arthur thought that was not good for her health so Mae quit smoking, only to pick up a few weeks later her old habit of snuff-dipping. Mae says she has had a craving for snuff as far back as she can remember. "Mama marked me with the snuff-craze before I was born," she explains. "When I was a little bit of e baby I'd stand at my aunt's knee and reach for her toothbrush. She started giving me a little dab of snuff on her finger when I was two year old."
Pale and listless, Mae sits through most of her days hoping for the time when Arthur will have secured the job which will provide then with the things they want. "I don't have but four dresses and two of them is about wore out. I get so tired of wearin' them old clothes I don't know what to do, Sometimes I've thought about goin' to the relief to see what kind of dress they'd give me." Without enough housework to keep her busy and without any recreational interest of any kind she simply sits and waits.
In the afternoons this summer Mae has helped Arthur a little in the garden. That garden has been of real benefit to them. They have had more butter beans than they could use and they have shared them with the Bensons who live in the other half of the first house on Reservoir St.
Sam Benson was reared on his father's fifty-acre farm in Johnson County. His father, John Senson, who could not write his own name married, the young school teacher who came to teach la his community. Through her influence and John's hard work they accumulated enough to buy and equip a fifty-acre farm. Here the elder Benson reared his three boys and three girls, working them in the fields and giving them hardly any time off to go to school. His wife taught the children at home and sent them to school only to take examinations. After this fashion Sam Benson finished the sixth grade.
Sam was fifteen years old when his mother died. It was the year before the price of cotton and tobacco began to soar. The Bensons, like their neighbors, entered into a hitherto unknown and unexpected prosperity. They spent money recklessly because they believed easy money had come to stay. "Why, it wasn't at all unusual for me to stop my ploughing at eleven o'clock just to drive into Benson, seven miles from out house, to get me a coca-cola, "Sam relates."Money come too quick to most of us and we never knowed how to manage it."
Their greatest financial misfortune came to the Bensons when the elder Benton entered into land speculation. Without the advice of his wife who had been his mainstay, he made unwise deals which led to the loss of his homestead.
Dissatisfied with farming as a renter, John moved his family to the cotton mill. There he hoped to save money to buy land. After five or six years he saw that this hope would never toe realised and he moved back to his home community and rented land where once he had been the owner. Sam with his young wife stayed on at the mill, cherishing the hope that had brought his father there. He was young and more years lay ahead. If he tried hard enough, maybe he could save enough to buy a Small farm. Today most of his hope has vanished. He and his wife make f joint weekly wage of nineteen dollars and on that they and their three children live.
"They's no reason that I can see why I shouldn't be paid that much or more and me work full time" Sam argues. "My wife's place is at home anyhow, and we could come nesrer savin' a little if she was here to look after things. As it is, what we make together won't cover our expenses for bare livin'. We have to pay a girl to stay here and look after things when both of us are work in. Unless conditions changes a eight, my farm'll just be something I hope to have. If ever I do get anything ahead I want to get a piece of that same land we owned."
Next door to the Hinsons and the Beneone, Eva Hardison, her husband and their three sons live. Her fourth and youngest son is in a CCC camp in Oregon.
Eva greets strangers in an easy, friendly way. Her speech is better than that of most of her neighbors. One of eleven children, she was born on a small farm near Wilmington, worth Caroline. At eighteen she married Otis Hardison who was working as box-car carpenter for the railroad. While their children were still young they managed to save enough money to buy e. lot on which they built a fire-room house a few years later. "I was so happy, watching that house go up," Eva says. "Papa had always said he hoped all of his children would live in home of their own. The children were so proud of their new home, too. We had it all paid for when the Union called a strike. Otis was loyal to his Union and he wouldn't go back to work until he got orders from the Union. When he did go back the railroad wouldn't have him, and he couldn't get anything else to do.
"Finally we had to mortgage the home to get food she continues."That was the last of our little place for us. It was a whole year before Otis got regular work, and it was too late then to start saving money for the mortgage even if he had been making enough so we could.
"Otis got work in a cotton mill in Wilmington. In a year or two he had worked up to $18 a week. The thought of losing: our home had got to where it didn't hurt so bad and we were taking great pride in our children. The oldest boy had finished the tenth grade and he said there wasn't anything that could keep him from finishing high school. The next to the oldest one was in the ninth grade and everybody said he had a good chance of being one of the best football players in school. That was in 1933 (?). There wasn't money out of $18, of course, to buy them clothes like they wanted to wear to school. Jim, the oldest one was always planning ways he could help himself. Well, when school was out we managed to get him in a CCC camp and I was to save the $25 a month he sent home so that he could have things like other boys during his Senior year. Then, the strike wee celled and Otis, who'd joined the textile union, walked out with the other strikers. The company opened the mill and sent out word for all the help to come back but it hadn't give to the workers any of the things they'd struck for. The Union told its members to hold out and they'd win the the end. Otis waited while one by one folks give in and went back to work. One morning he came to me and said 'I can't hold out no longer. We don't have a place to mortgage this time sad I'm not going to stand by and see my family starve. I looked at Otis and said, 'No, you're not going beck now, Otis. I didn't want you to join this Union because I remembered what a strike bed cost us. But you joined anyhow, and now you're not going back on the Union when it needs you. I'd rather starve than see you turn yellow.
"I kept Otis out and when the strike was called off he went to ask for his job back. His boss man looked at him right herd and said, I'll let you know when we need you. The next day we got our moving orders.
"Well, we moved out to an awful little house in another part of town and there we stayed. School started but Jim stayed on at the CCC camp. The $25 a month he sent home was all me, Otis, and the other three boys had to live on. You couldn't imagine unless you'd been through with something like it yourself how we suffered that winter. We didn't have half enough to eat and no clothes at all. Day after day I had to sit and think of my boy in the CCC camp while his heart was set on finishing high school. And, Claude, the second one, wouldn't go to school because he didn't have decent clothes to wear. I thought I'd go crazy seeing him look so sullen and bitter, and thinking maybe he blamed me because I had persuaded his Papa to stick by the Union.
"My boys had always attended Sunday school regular but since then the two oldest ones, have never been inside of a church. Until yet I don't know how we lived through that winter. The year wore on and Jim was still at the CCC camp. We sold our furniture, and with the money we got came to Durham looking for work. Moving some distance away was the only way a striker could get a job. Durham strikers went to Wilmington and Wilmington strikers came here. It was a miserable year for them that had made an effort to get what they honestly thought was their rights. Folks who wasn't mixed up in it can't ever know how much punishment we had to take.
"They didn't ask us here if we had been in the Wilmington strike and if they had, we would have lied of course. Working people can't live without work, you know.
"After all I've suffered from the Union, I still believe that we've got to organise If we're ever paid a decent wage. The first thing we've got to get is the right to organize. Some people think we have that now but it doesn't always work. Do you know what would happen to my husband at this mill if he so much as talked Union amongst the worker? They'd put him on a new job he didn't know has to do and give him three times more work than he could do. In a day or two his boss man would say "Guess I'll have to let you go since you can't keep up with your work.
"Another thing that makes it hard on the Union is the feeling folks hold against it who have been hurt by it. My two oldest boys are so bitter toward the Union they don't even like to hear the word mentioned. From what i've been able to understand in the papers the government is doing all it can to give workers the right to organize and I hope they'll be successful. I want to know for sure before Otis ever joins again. My life has been made hard by doing what seemed to be right and I don't want a threat hanging over me any longer. Me and Otis will live at the mill as long as we can get work, I guess, and I don't mind it at all. If he could get regular work and a good wage I'd just as soon be here as anywhere else. But my boys hate it and I pray for the day when they'll be able to find something else to do."
During the past winter Otis and the two oldest boys have worked when they could in the East Durham Mill. Borne weeks only one of them had work and other weeks the three of them worked from one to three days. They are still paying for the new furniture which they had to buy when they moved to Durban. Their grocery account which they run with a local store is always in arrears. The boys, thwarted and bitter, contribute, most of what they make toward house hold expenses and never mention the ambitions they once had.
Next to the Hardisons, Eunice, Smith, her husband, Vernon, and their three children live. Eunice, whose father was a renter, tells how the family came to the mill. Her older brother, a tenant farmer who never did see any money from one year's and to the other, left home first to go to the mill. Later, a representative of the company came out and persuaded the whole family to do likewise. "They was for help in them days, "Eunice recalls.
Eunice married at seventeen but she was twenty-eight years old before her first child was born. At the beginning of their married life she and Tom both worked and they had a fairly good living. Then when high wages came they bought things they'd only dreamed of before. "I bought me a piano, "Eunice says, "and I've never played a note on it yet. Tell you how come I think I done it. When I was a child the Johnsons' they was the ones that owned the place where we lived -- had a piano and I used to think I'd give half my life to have one and to be able to play it. I reckin havin' them thoughts when I was a child was how come I bought one when I got the money. I done e lot of foolish spendin', but who knowed then that these awful times was ahead. Most of us at the mill had seen hard times all our lives and it was such a pleasure to us to be able to buy things we didn't have to have. Then too, livin' was higher than some may remember and they wasn't as much chance to save as it sounds like when just wages by itself is mentioned. Well, we are livin' hard enough now and doin' a sight of work when we do get to make time.
"These three past years have been hard enough to make e body wonder if life is worth life is worth Iivin' a tall. I've fought so hard to stay off relief that I think I cheated myself out of part of my work benefits. Otis wasn't gettin' any time stall in the mill lest winter and some weeks I got one day and then again two. I reckin we could have been drawing work benefits but we hadn't signed up for it. At first I thought it was the same as signing for relief and I wasn't willin' yet to do that, though I wonder now how we kept from starvin'. There was several months when the five of us lived on as little as three dollars e week. When I'd have as much as three dollars at a time I'd buy a twenty-four pound sack of flour and a bucket of lard. We lived off of biscuit bread and what stuff I'd canned the summer before. I reckin it went harder with Musetta than any of us because she was throwed more with them that had than any of the rest of us. Then, too, she don't like living at & cotton mill. Me and Jim have always enjoyed cotton mill life well enough until it got to where we couldn't make a livin' at it. We'd be content to stay on the rest of our lives if we could get full-time work instead of two or three days like now when the work's so heavy that three days wear you out more than a full week did before we got the stretchout.
One of my boys wants to be a policemen and the other one wants to be a farmer. I won't worry about them for awhile yet. Right now I'am trying to help Musetta get fixed up for the kind of life she wants."
Musetta who is sixteen is the only daughter and oldest child. She finished high school in June. Sensitive, intelligent, and appealing, she has struggled through every possible chance toward self-improvement. As a member of the Industrial Girls' Club of the Y. W. O. A. She was sent to a state conference to represent her group. She cherishea the experience she had there. With unbounded determination she went through her last year of high school when each day she felt that she could not keep on.
"Most people look back on their Senior year as a pleasant time in their lives, but I won't, "She says. "I walked the three miles in to high school every morning because I didn't have money for bus fare. The walking wouldn't have been so bad if I hadn't been afraid each day that mu ragged shoes would fall apart before I could possibly get to school. Then, too, walking in the early morning can make you awfully weary when you haven't had any breakfast and not much supper the night before. Without decent clothes and without enough food I went every day and heard my classmates discuss their plans for the future. I didn't talk any because I was afraid even to think what my future might be.
"I worked as hard as I could at my typing and shorthand but I really didn't feel like I knew enough when school was out to start looking for a job. This past month I've been taking a review course under Miss Tenny. It's cost me twenty-five dollars and it had to be paid for out of the little bit Mama earns in the mill. The family had to sacrifice so I could have that money, but then, they got used to doing without most things this past winter. I'll make them proud of me one day, though, when I get a job I'll help the boys and they'll have happier memories of their senior year than I have of mine.
"It won't be so awfully hard to get e job, will it? The other day I asked Miss Tenny if it wasn't time I was sending out applications. She said, why yes, she thought so, and then asked me who my father's business friends were. I told her my father was a hard-working cotton mill hand and he had no business friends. But surely I can get a job on my own. I'll have to. because I can't stand to live all my life at a cotton mill village."
Spencer Mill Village
Spindale, N. C.
September 28, 1938
I.L.M.
ELLIE ROBERTSON
She lives in one of the better-kept mill house located on Spindale St. Her yard is clean, her porch lined with flower boxes. A lacy, luxuriously-fronded fern graces the front entrance. Not far from it an enormous begonia droops with waxy red blooms. There are petunias and marigolds blooming about her doorstep. A big-leafed vine shades half of her porch. The vine makes a cool nook for the swing in which she she occasionally spends an hour or so during the summer time. She loves her home and she loves to stay in it.
She cares very little for picture shows and she has never cultivated an interest in other forms of amusement. Her husband likes square dances and goes to them. She stays at home with the children. The children, like their mother, have little interest in picture shows except when Shirley Temple is on. The oldest girl became frightened at a terrific fire scene in a picture when she was six years old. She was unaccompanied by an older person, and was with a child from across the street. Badly frightened she ran out of the show and home to her mother. Her mother says it was perhaps a good thing that she got soared then. She has never given her the trouble some children give their mothers in wanting to go to more shows than they can afford.
Ellie is industrious and devotes much of her time to washing, ironing, cooking, and sewing for her family. Now in late September she and the children are digging e pit for keeping the flowers during the winter months.
There are two pieces of furniture in Ellie's house of which she is very proud. One is a big-cabinet radio and the other is a GE frigidaire. She keeps a clean house and a certain amount of order despite the many china cats, dogs, and other gewgaws which adorn the place. She becomes irritated at the thought that the mill company is so slow in repainting the houses, particularly the interior. "My notion is the superintendent is just a cheap guy and he don't won't to spend any more money on the houses than he can help," she says. "He likes to save all the money that's made for the company. They've promised me some new back doorsteps for six months and I haven't got 'em yet. It's been talked that they are goin' to sell all their houses and we'll have to rent 'em at a sight higher rent. If they do that, they'll be bound to raise wages soma or there'll be plenty that caint live on what they make. It would be hard on us and Jack gettin' one of the beet wages in the mill."
Ellie's husband makes $30 a week. She thinks he has done so well because he's stuck to his work, always putting work first and never thinking of such e thing as asking for a day off. And too, he has always been handy with machinery. That, she thinks, had a lot to do with his getting to be second hand in the weave room.
They were married when she was eighteen and he was seventeen. They had been neighbors always, living on mountain farms not far apart up in the Chimney Rock section. Ellie's father owned about a hundred acres of land, a large part of it in mountain pasture. But there were acres down below where they raised corn, beans, potatoes, cabbage  more than was needed for home consumption. Ellie's father took the surplus to market and brought back cash which he saved for tax money.
Everybody worked on that farm. Ellie herself could hoe before she was seven. She remembers long, back-breaking days of fodder-pulling, bean-picking, and hoeing.
In the winter Ellie attended the near-by country school until she had completed the seventh grade. Her father had gone to school two months. "But he's a sight better scholar than I am," Ellie says. "Nobody could fool him at figgers and he always keeps up with what's in the newspaper."
Ellie and Jack moved to the mill as soon as they were married. Jack started off in the weave room and made good. It was 1919 and wages were high. Ellie and Jack boarded that first year and began buying their furniture on the installment plan. They had a bedroom suite paid for when they started housekeeping at the beginning of their second year.
They were married three years before their first child was born. The fourth and last was born during the big strike of 1934. "Strikers from the mills down below come here and took Charge," Ellie explains. "They was against the stretch-out that had just come on. They stopped the mill for awhile and plenty here in Spindale that Joined lost their jobs. I remember like it was yesterday leyin' in there in the bed and watchin' fifteen or twenty Spencer workers march up and down the street carryin' the United states flag and yelling out to the rest of the workers to join in a fight for their rights. They never got no new members and finally they quit. Jim went back to work as soon as the boss men got in charge and opened the mill up agin. He's never missed many days the thirteen year he's been here.
"I've knowed people though that's been willin' to work and somehow couldn't get along. I know a woman that had saved and bought her own house, and took care of her sick mother too. Her husband got out of e job and she was out down to one day's work a week. Her mother died and she didn't have money to bury her with. That was one Friday night back in the summer. Up to late Saturday they didn't know whether they was goin' to be able to bury her or not. Some of the neighbors went around and took up a collection to pay the grave diggers and buy the lot. Then this woman made arrangements with the undertaker and they got her mother buried Sunday mornin'. I heard the other day she was login' her place and I expect she has held it long as she can.
"A collection come hard back then because so many people wasn't gettin' full time. I've been glad that Jim's got to work so steady. Up to now we haven't had to draw any rocking chair money. That's what they call the unemployment money, you know. Of course nobody don't know in these times when they'll be laid off. Jim'll work as long as he can get work though."
JENNIE Robinson
She picks her way slowly along as she walks the rutted paths from neighbor's house to another on Factory Hill. Often she can be seen going to the house of Arthur Callahan, who is her brother-in-law, to borrow a cup of lard or a pan of meal. She makes a handy run-about for her family, and they humor her in the little thing which please her. Her protruding shoulder blade is as a burden which she cannot put down. The leaders in her neck seem to clutch at her head and draw it back with such tightness that her eyes have the perpetual look of one asking for mercy. Her body had grown through its crookedness and its wretchedness to not more than four feet, and one wonders at first glance whether she is still a child with time yet to attain her height. But upon closer view, it is plain that Jennie's face is old and there is no more time in which she can grow.
Jennie is the first-born of Maggie Robinson and she is twenty-eight years old. Maggie says that Jennie's trouble started from a fall she received when she was two years old. Maggie was working in the mill and Jennie was left in the care of an eleven year old Child. She fell off the porch one day and injured her spine. "But it never showed up to amount to anything until a year later when she had the pneumony fever." Maggie continues her story. "I noticed then when I'd take her out of her cradle that her little beck was beginnin' to curve. The doctor said it was caused from the fall and he told me to take her down to Atlanta for treatment. We got together what money we could and Tom took her down there. They wasn't enough money to keep her in Atlanta for long, and he brought her back home. The older she growed the worse her back got and the doctor put a brace on her body. She wore it for twelve years and I reckin hit was the brace that give her a chance to grow what little she did."
Jennie's voice is low and seems to creep out of the corner of her mouth. She turns herself slightly as she speaks so that she can look up into her listener's face. She went through the fourth grade in the public schools of Asheville, and then the authorities stopped her from school. She still feels resentful about it because book learning was r sight of pleasure to her, she says, and there was nothing much left for her to do. She wishes her father had gone ahead and sued the city as he planned to do when she was forced to stop.
There stands out in Jennie's mind one person who has been kinder to her than any other outside person touching her life. She is a former leader of the Girls' Club of factory Hill. "Law, she was one sweet thing, sweet as a angel, "she says as she turns her head to see that you understand her words. "She was good to me was always a smile on her face and it seemed that she us. So good  and so pretty," she finished and pushes her body deeper into the chair.
The Robinson family is always mindful of Jennie's feelings and they succeed in allotting to her a place which is that of an adult except where her physical limitations are a deterrence. She helps a little with the cooking and straightens around in the house a bit. Always when there's company she takes her part in the conservation. The Robinsons believe that it was only a lack of money which kept Jennie from having a strong, straight body and it is no shame to them that they did and accepted the wage that was paid them. Them, pride. Maggie is proud that her father who died at eighty years of age was able to work in the mill until two years before his death. He was tall and portly, she says, and as handsome a man as you are likely to find. Years ago he bought him a little place in the country and from there he drove his own car in to his work. Jennie, too, will join in listing his merits and she remembers good days she has spent at his house. Maggie's daughter, Alma, married Arthur Callahan who is Democratic Chairman of his precinct. That is another point of pride with the Robinsons and they like to tell visitors of the part Arthur plays in politics. Then, Jennie herself can command respect among her neighbors for her ability in quoting scripture.
Church attendance is an important part in Jennie's Life. She goes each Sunday to Patton Ave. Baptist church, and during the week following often quotes from the sermon that she has heard. Revivals are even a greater pleasure to her than regular sermons. She gone this summer whenever someone would take her to hear Rev, Ham who is holding a revival in the tobacco warehouse. "He's deep in the scriptures, "she says "and it does me good to listen to him. A few Factory Hill folks are goin' pretty regular to hear him, and they shorely need to, Not many;around here go to church at all."
She moves her crooked body and tries to bring it to ft better resting position. Her eyes look up out of her drawn-over head, and she Says in creeping, solemn tones, "Why don't they go to church? I'll tell you what's wrong with them. The devil has got a hold on 'em. Yes, he's shorely got good hold on more than one on Factory Hill."
740 9th St.
West Durham, N. C.
July 15, 1938
I. L. M.
MARY SMITH
It was about two o'clock in the afternoon and Mary was still busy with her dinner dishes. She asked me to come back to her kitchen, and there I met her oldest daughter, Janie, who was with her mother for a two weeks visit. Mary continued washing dishes while Janie, after rinsing them in a pan of hot water, dried them. The kitchen was clean and orderly and the least disturbing of all the rooms in the house in which to sit. I was glad that Mary after finishing with the dishes did not suggest that we go into another room.
I had been told that Mary was ill and I expected to find her in bed. When I asked her about her health she replied, "Yes, I'm sick with diabetes most of the time but I try to stay up as much as I can. The doctors at Duke are treatin' me and I go in twice a week when I'm able. They tell me my body is suffering from the brutish treatment I've give it all my life. If they mean work I reckin I have done as much as the next one." Then Mary told me her story.
Mary Smith was born in Orange County fifty-seven years ago. Her father was a renter and he found it difficult to support his eight children on what was left after the landlord was paid. Not that the children didn't lend a helping hand. Mary cannot remember when she did not contribute her quota of work-hours toward her own support. At six she stood up in a chair to wash the dishes and prepare the scanty meals for cooking while her mother labored in the fields. There were then three smaller children who required the time left over from housekeeping duties. As she grew older there seemed no way to make a little time for school. She thinks that reading must indeed be a great pleasure. Many times she has picked up a book and sat with it in herhands wishing that she might know what was inside its pages.
When she was eleven the family income was supplemented by group participation in a relatively new industry. Smoking tobacco was gaining in popularity and the manufacturers of the product needed many small bags in which to pack it for distribution. The bag factories which grew up in answer to this need sent the bags out by the thousands into the surrounding countryside to be strung and tagged. During periods of slack in farm work Mary and her young brother walked the five miles into Durham and took back to their home two large sacks, each containing ten thousand small bags. She can remember sitting up all night on occasion during the rush season, each member of the family working as hard as he could to string these sacks for which they received thirty cents a thousand. When sleep laid such a heavy claim on her that she felt she could no longer stand it her mother sent her out on the back porch to dash cold water on her face that she might keep her eyes open yet a little longer. The year she was twelve her skill increased so that she raised the family income by several dollars, and her parents out of appreciation of her industry bought her two percale dresses instead of one.
By the time she was fifteen years old her father had decided his family would have a better living at a cotton mill than they could ever make for themselves on another man's farm. They sold the mule and the cow but they kept the twenty-six chickens for a while after moving to town. The nice fresh eggs came in handy because wages weren't so high that such things could be bought in plenty.
Mary began work at twenty-five cents a day. Her hours were from six to six but she will tell you that she doesn't believe the twelve hours then were any harder than eight hours now what with the speed-up system they have. Her man Jim comes in clean wore out at the end of a day, but of course she knows he's not a young man any longer. In fact, his working days are almost over because he's not so far from sixty and his body is none too stout.
When she married at eighteen she was making four dollars a week and Jim four dollars and a half. If it hadn't been for the installment plan she wonders if they ever could have bought the two beds and stove with which they began housekeeping. Nighttimes Jim made four chairs and a table. With so much furniture in their house they decided to take a couple of boarders to help with the installments still to be paid. The furniture wasn't more than paid for when Mary had to have an operation which cost Jim fifty dollars. That was three months before her first baby was born and another baby was on its way before the debt was finally paid.
Sometimes when her health was too bad to work in the mill Mary took up her old occupation of stringing bags. The wage had increased to fifty cents a thousand and with steady use of her spare time she could do a thousand a day. In the course of time five children were born to Mary Smith and four of them managed to live past babyhood. Mary's last child was born in 1912. It didn't live but three days and the Smiths had to borrow the money to bury it. "That year was one of the hardest in my life," Mary told me that afternoon. "The doctor started comin' to see me in early May and there wasn't a day from then on until the middle of September that he didn't come to our house. As soon as I was out of bed Jim took sick with the typhoid fever and for six solid weeks he wasn't able to work. Two of the younguns took the fever from him. If we couldner got credit we woulder starved. It was many a year before we ever caught up again. We was in such bad shape that the two. younguns was forced to go in the mill though I'd hoped to keep 'em out until they'd had a little more chance for schoolin'."
The oldest boy entered the mill at twelve and the oldest girl at thirteen. The boy has been there since except for sick leaves in the past few years when he has been bothered with hemorrhages of the lung. He was such a scrawny, pale, little fellow that many a time when Mary went to rouse him on a cold winter morning she felt like turning away from the bed and letting him rest through the day. But she knew he might lose his job, and the money he made was badly needed. Sometimes now she wonders if his health wouldn't have held out better if she could have kept him out of the mill a few years longer until his body had been given more chance to grow.
This son married after thirty and he has three children, all too young to work, and a wife whose health is so poor she cannot work. He was brought home from the mill with another hemorrhage the other day and Mary is wondering how she can help him. It seems to her that the fourteen dollars a week Jim is making cannot be stretched over another need.
Mary paused at this point in her story and sat with her hands folded in her lap. Janie looked first at her' mother and then at me. "If it hadn't been for Mama my younguns wouldner had no clothes atall the past year," she said. "The mill where my husband works aint give its help but four days' work a week in over a year. Tom makes eleven dollars and its all I can do to feed, let along clothe, my crowd on that. My, children is pretty good about not complainin'. They'll set down one day right after another to dried beans and potatoes without raisin' a row. Of course, that oldest one has got all manner of pride and she caused me a sight of trouble for awhile when she had to wear a old coat to school that never fit her nowhere. The worst hurt I ever seen her, though, was along 'bout the last of school when her teacher tried to collect rent for the school books she'd been usin' all the year. I thought the State was furnishin' 'em free but they say everybody is supposed to pay rent on 'em. Emma Lee kept after me but I never had the money to give her. One day she broke down in school and cried and told her teacher they wasn't a penny at her home to pay for book rent. The teacher told her to stop worryin' then, and she never bothered her any more. Emma Lee says she's not goin' to stop until she goes clear on through high school."
Janie's four-year-old child came into the kitchen and propped herself against her grandmother's knee. Mary put her arm about the child and seemed to forget for a while that she was there. "Well, she'll have plenty time to go through high school since the mill can't take 'em until they are sixteen or eighteen, I don't know which," she said. "Of course it's hard to say if things keep on like they are who's goin' to furnish the money.
"It's been a funny thing about my own family," she continued. "Pa didn't have a single child that wasn't willin' to work to try to get ahead and they aint a one of us that's got anything today. They aint never been a time when one was havin' trouble that the others was able to help him out of the bog. They's three of us livin' now. One of my brothers whose wife died last year is gettin' just two day's work a week and him with eight children. I don't know how on earth he's livin'. The other brother is makin' $8 a week and he has four children at home.
"This is my pet," Mary continued, changing the subject abruptly as she drew the child closer to her. "She come over a week before her Ma did and I never heard a whimper out of her."
"Is she the next to the youngest?" I asked, addressing Janie.
"No'm, there's two younger than her," Janie answered. "My lap baby is just three months old and the knee baby in yonder room with her is two year old."
"Six children and her thirty-three," Mary said.
"That's more children than a working man can take care of" I ventured.
A queer sort of smile flitted across Janie's face and she lowered her head. Presently she looked up at me and said slowly, "You are right about that."
Before I left, all of Janie's children had been in the kitchen. The oldest girl, twelve, looked pale and undernourished. Two of the younger ones played about with a great deal of energy. They would be considered pretty in any average group of children and as I looked across at Janie I wondered how it could be. At thirty-three she is fat, sallow, and unkempt with a look of forty-five at its worst about her face and figure. Good-naturedly she watches her children at play and thinks no further than the next feeding of her small baby. Mary, clean and not unattractive, smiles with patient affection at her daughter and her grandchildren. She has a capacity for thinking ahead that Janie seems not to have.
Mary looks back over her past life and can see in it no period in which she might have saved for the days that are ahead. She will tell you that she has on occasion spent a little money for foolish pleasure but she wonders if a person could stand all the ups and downs of life without giving over now and then to foolish things. Occupying a prominent position on her mantel in the front room is a rose-colored goddess edged in green, propping itself against a, green scooped-out tray which serves miscellaneous uses. She bought it for herself at the fair about ten years ago and she's still proud of it. In no less conspicuous places in her front room are framed pictures of the Rock of Ages; Jesus, the Savior; and a bordered motto of her missionary society. A good many of her extra quarters have gone through the channel of the church to help the heathen in foreign lands to a better way of life.
She faces sixty with assets spent and liabilities yet to be reckoned with. Her chief asset in life has been her capacity for labor and from that, the one material asset she has saved for herself is something like two hundred dollars worth of furniture. The mill can no longer use her and she knows that Jim's days of usefulness are numbered. There has been talk on the hill in recent months about old age benefits. All that Mary understands out of that talk is that when Jim is sixty-five he will begin to draw a little money. She says it isn't reasonable the amount will be enough to keep them both. Actually Jim will draw with interest the 112% of his wage saved for him and matched by his employer during his work years beginning with 1936. If his fast-failing health will permit him to serve the mill for two more years he will consider that nothing but luck is carrying him on. He will be sixty-one then with only four more years to go before he starts collecting his old age benefits which with care would last him about six months.
Just before I left Mary's house she looked out of her kitchen window and across the hill. For awhile no one spoke and the hum of the mill was the only sound to be heard in the room. When Mary began to talk it was as if she thought that Janie and I, too, must have been thinking with her on the growth of the mill. "Yonder mill want one-tenth the size it is now when I first come here forty-two year ago," she said. "It seems like me and Jim's got old with the mill but age aint hurt the mill none. When it slows down it can git new parts and we caint. What's worse we soon aint goin' to have money to buy rations for feeding our wore-out bodies. The mill keeps makin' money but it has to give to them that's young and strong, I reckon, and even to them it caint give a regular livin'."
Mary would like to have a little place of her own on the edge of town where she might raise a garden, and small patches, along with chickens, hogs and a cow--especially a cow. She knows the country can be hard, bitter hard, because she hasn't forgotten when she was six years old. But then she was working for the other fellow and she believes it would be different if the land and house were hers. Nobody knows better than Mary that such thoughts are but an idle dream. She says that all her life she has known nothing but half-living and she expects no miracle when her days of usefulness are behind her. She does wonder sometimes what kind of a life lies before her children and grandchildren.
Elsie Wall sits on her porch between dinner and supper and rocks in her chair with a complacence that nothing is able to undermine. Her husband, Jim, makes six dollars a week on a part-time job in the Wake Forest cotton mill. On that amount he, his wife, and their four children must live. On off days Jim tends his garden in which he has tomatoes, cabbages, beans, onions, and corn. Elsie says she does not know how to chop in a garden and that it's too late for her to learn.
She is thirty-two and looks forty-five. The leathery skin of her face is the color of a frost bitten pumpkin. The veins around her puffy ankles stand out in purplish blue blotches against the pasty skin of her legs. She thinks that standing on her feet in the mill must have caused the broken veins.
Elsie can cook and she can work in the mill. The mill no longer needs her and there's not much food at her house to cook. Her breakfast rarely changes. She knows now that a week from tomorrow she will have biscuit, coleuses, and coffee. The young children are fond of coffee and they do not have milk to drink. Sometimes the seven year old girl will say to Elsie, "Mother, just give me a cup of coffee; that's all the breakfast I want."
Jim buys the groceries for the family. It isn't that Elsie doesn't have time to do it. There are problems of arithmetic involved in grocery shopping that Elsie is unable to master. She stopped school just beyond the sixth multiplication table after having worked weeks upon it. Today it is the only one in which she feels at case.
Her oldest daughter, Tabby, is finding the same difficulties in arithmetic which checked her mother's progress. At twelve she is still in the fourth grade, Elsie says that it is surely the teacher's fault or Tabby could get along faster than she does. She believes that the teacher is the kind to neglect children who some from the mill hill. School had been out a month before Elsie knew her child had not passed her grade. On her way home from school Tabby had erased the "not" from "not promoted." After a month's time she told her mother whet she'd done. Elsie tried to figure out some way to send Tabby to the six weeks' summer school to make up her arithmetic but that school was not free. There's nothing for Tabby to do, if she goes to school next year, but to repeat the fourth grade.
Elsie does not intend to send her children to school next year, not even the bright and attractive girls of seven and ten. The questions she raises seem reasonable enough. How can her children eat and have warm clothes too out of six dollars a week? Would you be willing to have your child with not half enough clothes on his body stand out on the road some cold ioy morning and wait for a bus? Would you want your child to go to school in such rage that he was schemed every time a better dressed child looked at him? Mea there any child who wanted to be made fun of or to be pitied by his classmates?
She has been told that there is a law which will force her to send her three school-age children to school. In that case, she thinks the relief had better come out bringing warm clothes for them.
She'd like to see her children get educated, but it doesn't matter with her so much as it does with Jim. Jim thinks that the children can make a better living if they go through school. Her argument is that her children are no better than she, and she has had to work in the mill. Jim's answer to her argument is that their children have more sense than they, and if he can manage to send them through school perhaps they will find something else besides cotton mill work to do. Well, it's Jim's problem. She can't figure it on six dollars a week.
Elsie doesn't think that cotton mill life offers many advantages, especially this particular mill villages where the toilets are outside and there are no lights unless you are able to wire your own house. She says, "It's just as bad as living in the country." But one of the worst disadvantages, she says, is to have school teachers neglect your children because they come from the hill. A teacher with any sense should know that some of the people on the mill hill are just as good as people anywhere.
To Elsie it seems strange that some people never get over a feeling of shame at having to move to the mill. Her own mother, Clara Bedingfield, still holds hard feelings against her father, Charlie Bedingfield for bringing her to the mill. Her father teases her mother by saying that he is going to bury her in the village. Clara says that if there is such a thing as coming back to "hant" a person she'll hant his so he'll know nothing but misery the rest of his life. All of Clara's children are married and live at the mill. Her brothers' and sisters' children live in and around Raleigh. Many of them have good positions. If Charlie had never moved her from Raleigh to the cotton mill she thinks her children would have done well, too.
Elsie thinks that such talk from her mother is highly abusing, Maybe she herself could have done better if her parents had stayed on in Raleigh and if she could have managed to get a job in which there wasn't any figuring. However, she likes the cotton mill fine if they could make a living at it. If she and Jim both could work or if Jim could make a living wage so that they could have lights in their house, plenty of food to eat, and good clothes for their children she wouldn't mind spending the rest of her days at the mill. There are plenty of good people to keep her company. On the other hand, there are some who are awfully ignorant, At least they seem ignorant to her or they'd never take up so much time with the Holiness religion. Her neighbors right across the road belong to that religion and they certainly do strange things.
It was after this fashion that Elsie talked with me the other day when I eat with her on her front porch and looked across at one of her Holiness neighbors. An elderly woman stood in the doorway and beat off a jazzy rhythm to which she supplied a crooning sort of song.
"She may get into the unknown tongue by night," Elsie said, "One thing I'd hold against joinin' with 'em' is wearing long sleeved dresses. A regular member is supposed to wear long sleeves even in the summer time."
After this remark Elsie looked at me with a devilish smile, and a merry twinkle in her eye that belied the yellowed illness of her skin. Encouraged by my response that I found long sleeves uncomfortable in hot weather she continued.
"And I never could get up enough faith in God to trust to "layin" on hands," for healin' the sick. The Bible says send for a physician. When my little home remedies fail I want to send for one that knows more than I do, Have you got that much faith?" she queries unexpectedly.
"Well, I guess I'm like you in that respect," I answered. "When I'm ill I want a doctor." After a moment I asked, "Do you belong to the doctor's list?"
"Yes'um, and that's something else to come out of them six dollars." The sudden realization of how much Jim's meager weekly wage had to do provoked her to laughter. She chuckled lightly. I found myself chuckling too.
"You've got no notion how much children can want," she said when she was ready to talk again. "Mine worry me to death about the movies but the only time they get to go now is when their Grandma Bedingfield gives 'em a dime."
"Are those pictures in there on the mantelpiece some of their favorite stars?" I asked, glancing into the shadowy interior of the near-by room.
"Mo'm. Them's pictures of the Lord. They've got actor pictures though. Come on in and I'll show 'em to you."
Inside the respectably clean room Elsie brought forth framed pictures of Helen Twelvetrees, Ginger Hogers, Jean Harlow, and Gene Autrey. At the mention of these names the three girls came rushing out of the adjoining room and began discussing excitedly the merits of their favorite stars. Ginger was such a good dancer. Jean was beautiful and they hated she had to die. Gene Autrey was just about the best one in the movies. They'd like to see him every Saturday.
I looked with interest fit the animated expressions of the seven-and ten-year-old girls. They reminded me of young movie stars themselves with their black curly hair, their bright blue eyes, and their heart-shaped faces. Tabby stood by with an adenoidal expression that would stay with her even if the adenoids were removed.
The room in which we stood had only one bed. Two connecting rooms had one bed each. Buckets and pans dotted the floor of the room to the right.
"I've just got them ready in case it rains," Elsie explained. "The roof leaks so bad during a heavy rain it's like being out doors."
When we were seated again on the porch Elsie said, "Some folks are having a hard time on this hill. There's my sister-in-law Sarah Wall who's got six children all crowded in three rooms, I don't see how she does it. Her man don't make much more than mine neither," she finished as she rocked slowly back and forth in her chair.
A few minutes later as I was leaving I ventured to say "I hope you do find some way to send your children to school this year."
"Would you want to send a child of yours out on a bitter cold morning and him not having enough clothes to keep his body warm?" she asked me. "Children hate to look different from other children. A child's got a sight of feeling about such things."
"Yes, I know how you feel," I said, and turned to leave. I looked back and Sarah was rocking complacently on her porch. Her three pretty children and the adenoidal child eat in a row on the steps and watched me until I had passed below the hill.
SARAH WALL
About a mile from Wake Forest College and a quarter of a mile west from Faculty Drive there is a ramshackle eight-room house which serves as a home for four families. The house is the only one in its row which belongs to the near-by cotton mill. A railroad track bordered on each side by overgrown weed patches separates it from kindred houses which furnish homes for other mill workers. Cheap curtains of varied design flap against the ledges of the big, unscreened and shadeless windows and seem to accentuate a desolation they were meant to conceal.
The unfinished appearance of the house makes one wonder just for a second when the carpenters will return to complete their job. That thought does not linger. Obviously the carpenters have long since passed it by. It stands there now weary with a hardening and graceless age which has made of it a shell enclosing the dally activities of fifteen people.
Within three of three rooms Sarah and Johnnie Wall and their six children live. It was Sarah who invited me into the old house the other day when I knocked on the front door. I followed her into the first of her three small rooms and sat down in the only sturdy-looking chair she had. Sarah seated herself on the bed which had been that morning stripped of its covering.
"I'm Sorry you ketched me so dirty," she said, "but even if I'd knowed you was coming I don't know is it woulder made any difference. I've washed all day long and I said I'd stop and rest awhile if I never got anything else done.
Sarah was barefooted and her run-over shoes lay in the corner where she had kicked them when they had begun to hurt her feet early that morning. Her old brown cotton dress was ringed with sudsy water from the wash tub. All of her looked tired except her eyes. Their mild brightness gave to her the undaunted appearance of a Millet peasant.
The room swarmed with files. It was dirty but there was no evidence of accumulated uncleanness. The three-year old child who lay on the small bed in the corner knocked fretfully at the flies which lighted on his dirty face. His older sister had put him to bed just as he was when he came in from play. He is ill with whooping-cough and his coughing interrupted Sarah frequently as she talked with me.
"I was born out in the country in this very county 34 year ago," she began, "and my Pa run a saw mill. He out lumber up in what they call the Harricanes, and made fairly well but there was ten of us at home to provide for. He moved to the cotton mill so's some of the older ones could find work.
"Pa died when I was ten year old and me died when I was twelve. I stayed then with one of my older married sisters who was here at this mill. I had to go to work in the mill to make my livin' and there was no more time for schoolin'
When I was sixteen year old me and Johnnie married. Since then I've worked between the times when I wasn't havin' children. Johnnie worked one shift and I worked the other go's one of us would always be here with the children. I done the cookin' and the housekeepin', too, such as was done.
"I've worked none atall now for the past three months. When the mill went on one shift I was out off. I told my husband the other day I reckin it was just as well because I was so near wore out I probably couldner stood the work through the hot summer anyhow. They're workin' 'em like mules down there in the spinnin' room, I know some that's had to quit. They say they'd just as soon perish to death as work theyselves to death.
"The mill closed down last December and when it started again in January it run a week and stopped a week. Three months ego it started up full time but just one shift a day. That throwed some out of work altogether. John had been makin' $l5 a week it second hand in the spinnin' room on the shift that was out off. Since then he's been doin' odd jobs about the mill and they pay him eight dollars a week."
Sarah's baby, a pudgy-looking child of eighteen months, toddled into the room and clutched at his mother's knee. She took him into her arms and for a minute forgot that I was present.
"Out of that eight dollars you have to pay rent, clothe, and feed your family?" I asked.
"I've got a garden and it helps some, "Sarah answered." The beetle bugs has been bad this year and just about ruined my snaps but I've got butter beans yet.
"Summer we've been able to live through but what we'll do when winter comes the Lord only knows. They's four in school and they've got to have coats and shoes. I'll be bound to find work somewhere. I want them children to stay in school till they finish high school. Then they'll be able to find somethin' to do besides work in a cotton mill,"
Sarah looked up at me and there was an increased brightness about her eyes as she added slowly, "I hope never to see a youngun I've got go in the mill for even one day's work."
"Why?" I asked.
"Because it's unhealthy work and it wears you out before yore time. Not gettin' enough money to live decent don't help yore health neither. Do you reckin I can buy milk for this crowd on what John's gettin? Well, I do try to get a pint a day for them two least ones but that aint enough. Now and then the others get some canned milk sweetened up with sugar. They like it and it's cheaper than fresh milk but I caint buy much of that. Doctors can tell you to buy milk for your children but that don't help none if you don't have the money to pay for it."
"You have so many children to buy for," I said.
"More than we've got any business with," Sarah replied promptly. "I told Johnnie when the last one was born that I thought it was a pure sin for people to have so many children when they caint half-way provide for 'em. Such things don't seem to bother men like they do women, though."
The baby in the small bed began to choke with phlegm and Sarah walked swiftly across the room to raise his head while he coughed. A fetching little girl of five came into the room gnawing on a green apple. She edged up close to my chair and stood grinning at me until her mother seated herself again on the bed.
"Mrs. Pearce is goin' to get you if you don't leave her apples alone," Sarah said to the child.
"I never got but two," the child replied, smiling at her mother.
"She's the one that liked to died with pneumonia year before lest," Sarah explained to me. "She was sick for so long I think we sorter spoilt her, for forty-one days she was at Rex Hospital and long after she come home she had to stay in bed. Me and him both was workin' and it was a good thing. We never coulder got the $150 hospital bill paid off with Just one workin'. If there'd been a doctor bill after she was brought home I don't know what woulder become of us. For four or five year we've been on Dr. Timberlake's list. Every week eighty cent of John's pay goes to Dr. Timberlake. He charges ten cent ahead, you know. Then, when we need him he comes and there's no regular doctor bill to pay."
"You are still able to pay 89 a week out of John's eight-dollar wegel" I asked.
"We aint able to," Sarah replied. Then with a little bitter smile she added, "But we aint able not to either. Run on out to play, Nancy," she said suddenly to the child who was still gnawing on her apple.
Soon after, Sarah's fifteen and thirteen year old daughters came into the room." we've got seven more places of candy to sell, Mama," the oldest one said.
"Then you'uns both will have money enough to go to the show?" Sarah wanted to know.
"Yessum, and I hope Gane Autrey's on, too," the youngest one said.
"They are real crazy about westerns," Sarah remarked. "See them two cowboy pictures on the mantelpiece. Well, they got them by savin' tops from Dixie cups. They are prouder of them pictures then the little once are of them Easter baskets you see hanging against the wall over yore dresser."
The dresser, the large bed, the small bed, a sewing machine, an old trunk, my chair and a red flowered linoleum comprised the furnishings of the room.
I knew the door just behind me, was ajar but I could not turn around and find out the answer to a question which was puzzling me: What sleeping arrangements were provided in the next room for the five oldest children? However, when Sarah was called out into the yard to settle a dispute among her children I did turn around and glanoe through the half-closed door into the other room. In there I saw a dilapidated single bed covered with old guilts. A table and a chair were the only other pieces of furniture. When Sarah came back I was talking to the two-year old baby. She noticed for the first time that the door behind me was not closed. Quietly she pulled it to. As she did so I felt her glence upon me. I did not look up to meet her eyes.
"Do you like to read?" I asked her presently.
"yes I do, and the children get some awful good books from the school library. "Last night I read till late from one may Belle got the other day. It's named "The Secret Garden. Did you ever read it?"
"Yes," I told her. "And I enjoyed it too."
"It's a good book," she said.
Then she asked me some question about the garden which I could not answer and I told her it had been some time since I read the book. For ten or fifteen minutes Sarah told me about the big old house, the lovely old garden, and the queer little boy. In Frances Hodgson's Burnett's "The Secret Garden" but I did not see the boy, nor the house, nor the garden. I could think only of the rickety little bed in the other room.
When she had finished with the story I asked her about her neighbors, "In the one room across the hall they lives Mrs. Wilson and her little boy. Her husband got killed on the railroad track two years ago. Upstairs in two of them rooms is Mrs. Hilden and her man. He works but she don't. She's goin' to have a baby next month. In the other two they's Mr. and Mrs. Hodges and their baby. It's a cute baby and if you'd like to see it she won't mind stall."
Following up Sarah's suggestion I climbed the unbanistared stairs and there to my left I saw an open door. At the sound of my steps a young women who had just taken her hands out of biscuit dough came to the doorway and asked me in. Her kitchen was clean and neat with its green breakfast room suite, the green kitchen cabinet, and the green oil stove.
"I came to see your baby," I said to her.
"He's in the other room," she replied. "Let me wash my hands and we'll go in there."
The five months old baby was playing on a pallet in the middle of the floor. He was a pretty child with light blue eyes and a well-shaped head. His mother picked him up and seated herself on the trunk. I eat down in the small rocking chair which belonged to the four-piece bedroom suite.
"Lord, I hope I don't ever have as many children as Mrs. Wall's got." she said by way of conversation.
"She does have a crowd," I agreed.
"I believe I'd die if I had that many and no way of taking care of 'em."
Gladys Hodges told me as we sat there together that she had been one of eight children. When her father died her mother moved with her family from the farm to the cotton mill. Gladys had to quit school and go to work after finishing the seventh grade. That had been a disappointment to her but those days were gone now and she was happy with her husband and baby. At the mention of her baby she reached out and touched his little head tenderly. Robert didn't make but nine dollars, she continued presently, but out of that they were able to buy groceries and meet the installments on the furniture. The bedroom suite cost them $60, the breakfast room suite $24, and the cabinet $25. She hoped before another year they'd have it all paid for. If no more babies came for a few years maybe they'd get ahead. Surely wages would go up again.
She seemed so happy there in the room with her baby and her bright new furniture. She was glad that company had come and found her room orderly and neat. There were many ornaments placed here and there of which she was obviously proud. She saw me looking at the blue spotted china dog with the daschund-built body and the bulldog head.
"The baby is crazy about that, too," she said, and I looked again at the baby.
In a little while I left this room and knocked on the door where Mary Hilden lived. There was no response to my knock and I made my way down the uncertain stairs. Out in the hall I met Sarah wall again.
"Do you think business'11 pick up enough by fall for mills to run two shifts?" she asked me.
"I hope so," was the only reply I knew how to make.
"If it don't, I caint see how we'll live," she said slowly. "I've got to get work and mill work is all I can do even if there was other jobs to be had, She shifted her left bare foot to prop it against the right."Have you heard any talk of raising wages?" she asked hopefully.
"Not in the last few weeks," I was forced to reply.
"They 's coal to buy in winter and warm clothes and shoes," she said. I was glad that the hall was filling with shadows. A moment later I had said good-bye and was walking down the worn porch steps. Up the road a little piece I saw Sarah's oldest child returning home with the candy box under her arm.
JOSEPHINE WALLACE
If you should meet Josephine Wallace you would more than likely say to yourself, "With a little more 'finish' She'd be a good-looking woman." She has a high forehead, well-shaped nose and mouth, and nice blue eyes. She keeps abreast of the styles -- perhaps a little too well -- and she is never without a permanent wave. Although she has worked in a cotton mill a good part of her life she does not look more than her forty years.
The ambition of Josephine's life is to keep her five children, more particularly her two daughters, out of the mill She does not mind the hard work she does each day because it is to provide advantages for her children. She is making seventeen dollars a week and her husband twenty-two. They apparently dread the impending wage out more than some families of lesser means because they hate to curtail in any measure the standard of living they hate worked out for their family.
If you should go to the Wallace home in all probability you would be greeted by one of Josephine's neatly dressed and well-mannered children who would enter into conversation with you as soon as you were both seated in the living room. The living room is cheerful, homey place despite the mis-application of color and the lack of taste in choice of ornaments. The door prop is a big china cat which curls itself in insolent laziness and manages to gaze at you no matter where you are seated. The mantel is adorned with two miniature covered wagons, one polar bear, a cat group, and a china centerpiece which features a little girl looking at a dog and asking, "Can' t you talk?" Wherever you turn in the room you are likely to see a gaudy-looking piece of statuary but in a little while you do not mind. Even the too much greenness of the flowered rug which is vying with the colorful drapery ceases to annoy you. Inevitably, you reach the conclusion that the people who live here have created for themselves a home.
The Wallace are congenial among themselves and they find friends who share their interest in music. The bad-toned piano is the pride of the household. If Ira Bell, the 17 year old daughter, were to coke in during your visit, she would ask you if you could play certain tunes and with a request that she play them for you she would respond readily. She might play Tippy-Tippy-Tim, a number or two from Snow White, several others from recent pictures, and almost certainly Duke University's song. Ira Belle and her sister have taken free music lessons for the past two years from the WPA teacher who also gives lessons on the Wallace piano to a number of other girls.
Ira Belle will take from the music rack a number of hymn-books and hand them to you for your Inspection. Among them will be a compilation by Gypsy Smith, a favorite of hers, Her grandfather Carrington who was born in England has told her that when he was a lad he ran away from home and lived for ahile with the gypsy tribe to which Gypsy Smith belonged. When you put the books aside Ira Belle will play for you a number of hymns which she and members of her family have sung in duet or quartet combinations at the local churches during revivals.
The Wallace children are proud of their mother and father. Josephine has told her children that their father traces his ancestry back to the Wallace clan that saved. The Crown of Scotland, and that gives the two girls a certain feeling of security as they attend the Durham High School. Ira Belle thinks that many more of the mill girls would go on through school If they were not made to feel inferior by classmates who have had superior advantages, The past year she was the secretary of her section, in which, an she expresses it, "All the girls were nice, smart girls and none of them high falutin'," Both of the girls say that Josephine has always seen to it that they were as neatly dressed as anybody in their classes.
One point of pride with Josephine's children is the fact that their father, who had very little grade school education, passed a correspondence course dealing with arithmetic. Josephine herself went through the seventh grade because conditions in her home permitted her to stay in school until she was fourteen.
Josephine Wallace is the oldest of five children born to David and Josephine Carrington. David, one of six children, was born in Bidston, Cheshire County, England. His father, a watch maker and diamond setter, sent him to grade school from the time he was three until he was eleven At eleven he entered Brassie's Shipyards and worked until he was fifteen Joining the English navy then he served for eight years and came out a skilled mechanic. Service had brought him to the Atlantic Coast of the United States and in David's words he had become a "free-thinker and wanted to spend the of his days in the United States. England in those days was too conservative for me "Shortly thereafter, having made his way to North Carolina, he met and married Josephine Smith who lived in the backwoods country, near Sanford. Josephine had to her credit only, six months of schooling. Her father had come home from the War Between the States crippled with arthritis and unable to do manual labor at all. His girls worked hard on the small farm which he owned and managed, to subsist in a meager, sort of way. David's skill as a mechanic, when a skilled mechanic was hard to find, made it possible for him to keep a Job and make Josephine's life a little easier than it had been. Soon after he was married his pay was increased from seventy-five cents to a dollar and a Quarter a day. When he told Josephine the good news she exclaimed "My Lord, that makes us rich foks for sure." She says that no money has ever made her prouder than that first week's wages with the raise for it seemed such a big amount after the lean, hard days She's known on the farm. From then on David made a fairly decent living for his family and by the year 1912 he had a small bank account.
At that time- letters from England reminded him that his mother was ageing fast and her health was failing. David could not overcome the desire to see his mother again. He sold all of his property except his household goods and with his wife and three children went to England. After a month's visit among his people, David and his family returned to North Carolina on the Aquitania.
Shortly after his return David secured a job as a mill mechanic in west Durham and he has been there since. Josephine as the oldest of the children felt the need of contributing to the family at an earlier age than the others Then, too, all the girls her age that she knew had entered the mill. Her younger brothers and sisters attained the age of sixteen before the life in the mill began. One of her brothers is married to a nurse and one of her sisters whose husband owns two houses in Asheville is supervisor in a cigarette factory in Richmond, The other brother and the other sister are married and working in. the same mill with Josephine.
Josephine is proud of her mother and father. She likes to tell you that the older Josephine, now sixty-one, got another permanent last week. She will look at the large photograph of her which stands on the piano, and say "That's a good picture but lot of folks have told me they didn't think it done Mama Justice." If her father"s name is brought into the conversation she will probably tell you that he is a thirty-second degree Mason.
Josephine's ambition for her children is hardly more pronounced than in her husband's. He is determined to educate his children so that they may make a living of which they will not be ashamed. Though Tom Wallace's father became Chief of Police of Burlington before his death, the older ones of his seven children, knew many hard days and were glad of a chance to work in the mill when they were no more than ten or eleven years old.
The Wallaces have not saved any money during their married life but they have provided their children 7 with a respectable home. If Josephine's health holds out and the mill continues to need them both they plan to send all their children through high school and to give the two girls business training to equip them for the profession of court stenographers.
15th. St
West Durham, N.C
September 12, 1938
I. L.M.
THE WILKINS FAMILY
It was visiting day at the Wilkins house, Saturday had come again and mother week of work in the mill was over. Nine Wilkins sat with me on her porch while she waited for her mother's arrival, her hair was freshly waved and she was dressed in a modish black Silk rayon dress. Out in the street her eight year old boy rode on his bicycle and yelled greetings at the neighbor's children as he passed them by. Now and then he licked out his tongue in t silly sort of way at come overall-clad boy who jeered at him because of his dressy clothes. Then his white-slippered feet peddled with greater seal as he rode scornfully on-beyond the sound of his jeerer's voice.
"He wore his hair in curls until he was six," Nina said pridefully when he passed the house and waved at her with one hand and turned his wheel into quick gyrations with the other.
She glanced down at her wristwatch and remarked that she had expected her mother earlier."She lives over on 12th St. with my youngest brother, and she always comes to see me on Saturday evenin'," she explained. "Gus is the only one out of the ten that Bint married so it makes it awful nice for him and Mama to stay together.
Presently a sports model red Ford roadater driven by a young man of perhaps twenty-five stopped in front of the house and Nina's mother, Annie King, got out. She was a big woman whose age showed in her wrinkled skin, but she walked up on the porch with a firm, easy, step.
"Mama has stayed more active than lot of women her age, Nina said as Annie walked forward.
When the introduction was, over Annie sat down in the rocking chair near me and began at once to talk. "well, it's a comfortable day, haint it?" she said. She rocked to and fro with a steady little rhythm while she surveyed the tiny smudge on her cleanly polished white oxfords. "Looks like e drop of oar oil," she, said, presuming that we too had our thoughts centered on the smudge on her shoes. The rocking continued. Annie's blue silk rayon Sunday dress gave to her a confidence which could not be shattered by a drop of oil on one of her shoes.
"Frances aint been over with the baby today?," she asked Nina.
"No, but she'll be here before long," Nina told her mother, and then turning to me she continued "Frances is my oldest daughter and she's got the outest baby you ever seen. She's such a good-natured child too. Frances took her to the beach with us week before last and we hardly heard a whimper out of her the whole time."
"Tell her 'bout how many of you in the same family went down there together," Annie suggested.
"Well, there was four sisters and two Sister-in-laws and each one of us took two daughters apiece. We rented a cottage at Carolina Beach and all of us stayed there a week. A piece come out in the paper about so many sisters and daughters and cousins going together for a vacation. We thought about sending one of the group pictures we made to the paper to see if they wanted to print it but we neglected doing it. Would you like to see some of the pictures?"
Nina and I went inside to look at the pictures while Annie sat and watched for her greet-grandchild. We went on into the living room which looked heavy with its load of furniture. There were two big chairs of blue velour and a davenport to match. There was a gold colored occasional chair and two straight chairs. Three tables laden with gewgaws vied for the center of interest. Pictures crowded the walls.
Nina took a paste board box from a table drawer, and from it she drew forth pictures which she handed to me. They were there, the whole crowd of them, in their bathing suits and again in their shorts and halters. There were pictures in which each person posed alone and after his particular fashion. One sister-in-law, the very stout one, sat in her bathing, suit covering her feet with send. There was an attractive group picture of all the young girls riding bicycles and smiling gaily. And then there was a picture of Annie King who had come down for the weekend with her oldest daughter's husband. She wore her Sunday dress and stood a little distance from the water's edge.
"It was a nice vacation," Nina said when I had looked at the last picture. "I hope we can go together every year. "When the pictures were put away we still sat on in the room and Nina told me some of the things she remembered out of her life.
Nine was born in Durham not far from the cotton mill in which she now works. Her father, Pete King had left the farm he rented and fox a few years did such odd jobs as he could find. Eventually he drifted to the cotton mill and when each of his children reached twelve they went to work at such jobs as the mill offered them. Pete worked too, but in all of his years he never found in the mill a niche in which he really belonged. He was a good man, Nina said, but he never seemed to get along. Always it was Annie's shrewd management which made the family's joint wages meet the demands of life. She knew how to cut corners and while her children were growing up she never did resort to taking in boarders nor to working in the mill herself.
Nina was fifteen when Annie lost her first child, a boy of seven. Pete had never believed much in taking out insurance on his children and for four or five month he and the older children saved what they could to pay off the little boy's burial expenses.
It was the same when Pete himself died a few years ago. He was running the freight elevator at the mill for $10 a week. He got his hand caught in it and his arm was broken. He was rushed to the hospital and the doctors gave him other. Pets never did wake up. When the family went to the mill representatives for compensation, the officials told them that the hospital was as responsible as the mill for Pete's death. The family pooled their credit and buried Pete. Some time later the company made a settlement with Annie, giving her $300 in addition to the amount which the funeral had cost the family.
Since her father's death Nina has had small insurance policies on her mother, her three children, and herself. Her husband carries a thousand dollar policy on himself. We never know when loved ones may die, she says, and it seems foolish not to be prepared for the emergency.
Nina who started to work at twelve has been in the mill a large part of the time since. She has bought for herself two bedroom suites, her living room suite, and a dining room suite. "We never had much when I was growing up" she said "end all my life I've been foolish over pretty furniture. "All the payments have been made on the furniture now and she is applying part of her wage on the Willis car which she and her husband have bought. Sometimes they take long Sunday trips to various points of interest in the State. They won't be able to ride vary much this winter, Nine said, because gasoline money will have to be saved for Vivian's school expenses.
Vivian finishes high school this year, Nina is determined that she shall have the money to participate in all the school activities of her class. "After she finishes school, Vivian Wants to go in training for a nurse," Nina said, "and I'm going to see that she has the chance. I give Frances beauty culture course and if anything was to happen to her husband she'd have a way of making her living. I'm awful anxious for all three of my children to have a trade and to be good at it. Poor papa never would have had such a time if he'd ever had the chance to learn some trade. I don't think it meant stall that he wouldn't have been good at something' just because he wasn't suited to mill work. Maybe if he ever coulder found the right job I coulder went to school a little longer before startin' to work."
The regret in Nina's voice seemed to linger on in the silence which followed her words. We sat there very quietly for awhile and I was glad when a young girl rushed into the room and broke the spell. It was Vivian, bearing in her hands a lovely brush wool sweater of delicate rose.
"Oh, Mama, you did get it for me," she said excitedly, and not seeming to notice that I was in the room.
"Well, I thought you'd get a lot of wear out of it because it'll go with both your little suits."
"I'll wear it to school the first day," Vivian Said and turned to speak to me. She sat down in the gold occasional chair and soon was telling me of the things she'd done during vacation. Nearly every week she'd gone in swimming twice a week in the swimming pool at the Auditorium. The admission was only five cents and you could stay in for an hour. The Auditorium, she explained, is the community building, built by the company as a recreational center for its employees and their families. Then at least once a week she went to a picture show there. The admission was only ten cents. She was excited about school and particularly pleased over her mother's promise to buy her a season ticket to the football games.
Nina listened with pride as her daughter talked, Once she interrupted her to say, "Maybe I've done promised you too much." Vivian laughed and replied "Maybe you'll get a raise."
"Not hardly when I've just took a out." Nina said. Turning to me she continued, "The last out put me down to $12 a week and my husband to $15. That's not bad wages when I remember some I've drawed but naturally the cut didn't please me none."
Presently we heard Annie calling from the porch to say that Frances was coming with the baby. We went out to greet them and stood around for a minute while Annie held the baby up for all of us to see.
"Ain't it a fine one?" she said, turning to me.
"Yes indeed," I answered. "One of the healthiest looking I've ever seen."
"Frances has raised it right by the doctor book," Nina said.
The various members of the family found seats for themselves on the porch and I made ready for my departure. Annie was still holding the baby and its, soft pinkness accentuated the age of her wrinkled skin She opened her mouth in a snaggled-tooth grin and made funny noises which seemed to delight the baby. The baby's soft toothless little mouth curved into a smile which brought smiles to its mother's and its grandmother's face.