R. L.Perry,
Macon County August 24, 1939
Life Story of Mary Simpson of Mt. Zion Community.
Mary Simpson is a dark brown skin woman. She is about 41/2 feet tall, weighing about 130. She has soft hair which she keeps dyed jet black. The gray root hair close to the roots may be seen. Her almost round face carries a very pleasant smile. When she talks to you she looks straight into your eyes with her sharp, dark brown eyes. She holds herself quite erect and has a quick gait. Her speech is clear but quick. She is a good entertainer.
She is a farmer and enjoys it. Most of the work is done on shares.
The year around you can find hams and bacon which she kills and cures on her place.
R.L. P.
Lacon county
Aug, 24, 1939
This very attractive and convenient farm home is about 12 miles north of Tuskegee. The house cream painted sets about 100 feet from the Franklin and Danville highway. It is a pretty little bungalow that is sure. to get a second look from passerbys. On. the. porch are pot flowers and porch chairs with white slip over covers. On etc; side of the gate entering the lane lending up to this lovely house is a rock column about four feet high in which are growing pretty cedars. Several bushes of Crepe Lyrtle are growing just inside by these columns, of back are Green shrubbery grows along the rock lined lane up to the yard where verbenas are blooming along the walk to the concrete steps.
The lawn is a thin of beauty. There lies on the left of this large lawn a lovely rock garden where grows zenias, verbenas and daisies. A large shady pecan tree stands to the left of the lawn about 15 feet from; left corner of the porch under which are two green lawn chairs. Pretty green shrubbery (some flowering)grows all around the house. A picturesque little flower garden of roses and other flowers lay on the right back side of the lawn where flitted bees butterflies and humming birds. A fence of shrubbery divides the front yard from the back yard. Setting on the right in the back is a large barn and stable, nearby is a chicken house and other little houses for various uses. There were lots and lots of plymouth rock and white leghorn chicken, in and around the stable. Peach, fig, and pear trees were hanging with lucious fruit. A flower garden is in the back. also. A well with concreted curbings is on the back with a rope and bucket hanging from a post over the well. a dipper and a cup is hanging there for passerbys. Of course this well is to be replaced very soon by the Government pump system. The government also has the Dixie line electricity out on this farm.
When I told Mary my mission, she hesitated at first. After I explained why and for whom I wanted the information, she agreed to ive it to me so many people visits this rather unusual woman who has achieved an enviable enviable resutation.
She was peeling peaches and they were nice ripe soft ones. She likes to share, so we both enjoyed the luscious <text not clear>. As we ate she began to tell me about herself.
"I was born right here in this community (Mt. Zion) January 1, 1876. I can remember very well how religious and good my mother was. She was a faithful Christian and always had family prayer. She taught us to kneel when we would pray. I can remember that my dad would sit up as we kneeled because he wasn't a Christian. My mother's daily Christian living and praying converted my dad. He joined the church and became a deacon. This made my mother happy. She lived to see all of us join the church.
"My parents more farmers and always worked hard and tried to teach all of us to work. My dad was brought here from Georgia a slave, Right here on this same spot my dad and mother bought 320 acres which belonged to the white people to whom my parents had been slaves. The white people said that they wanted their Negroes to have the land.
"I started to school when I was seven years old. My first teacher's name was Mr. Rich pots. Oh, I was so happy to start to school. I worried mother long before it was time for me to start to school. We could not start to school until we were seven years old. I do not remember having one fight in. school. There were two distinct classes in our school. One of these classes was called, fat boy's class and the pretty girl's class to which I belonged.
"I can remember how I always wanted something pretty for the house even when I was a little girl. I made my first quilt when I was about eight years old. When they would ask me what I wanted the Santa to bring me, I would always ask for vases for the mantle when I got a house of my own. I had seen large seven room homes, about three of them in the community, of course they belonged to white people. I was a little girl but I had hopes of some day owning a seven room house, nicely furnished, like those three seven room houses in our community. Evan though I had never seen a Negro in such house I believed that it was possible for any one to work and save and get a beautiful home. And if this was possible I had a mind that I would be one to own such a home.
"Aside from a beautifully furnished home I longed to own a fountain pen, a watch and chain and a pair of nose glasses." Here she laughed and said," I have to wear glasses now and I dont find it so pleasant as I dreamed when I was a girl'!
"I learned from my mother, at an early age to love Sunday school and church. While I was quite young, I remember a sermon the pastor preached when I was a child, but I was a Christian, his text was, 'Delight Thyself in The Lord, And He Shall give Thee the Desires of Thy Heart". I believed this statement, together with my mother's faithful Christian life helped me to struggle dad strive to get those things which were the desires of my heart. Yes, I believed that if I would try to serve the Lord that he would help me to realize my desires. I always went to Sunday school and church and tried to do what I could in my church and community to help make it better. I tried and still do try to help in Christs program to evangelize the world I may can't do much, but I do all that I can as far as I know.
"I was not able to go on as far as I wanted. to in school. So anxious was I to go to school that then I had a chance to go to Tuskegee, I was happy even though I did not have but fifteen cents. It was in 1895 I went to Tuskegee. At this time you did not have to pay an entrance fee. I worked in the day and went to school at night. I worked the first year in the Teacher's home. I worked the next year for Mrs. Penny and the next year I worked in the sewing room. I had only one apron, but I washed that apron in the evening, I would get up early iron that apron on the lamp ckimmney and make a clear, appearance the next day. I got so bare for clothes that Mrs Richardson, Cart. Richardson's wife that's at the Institute went to the "barrel room"and got me some clothes. She was a Riss Laura Labry then. At Tuskegee in those ways the Northern white people would send barrel of clothes down for poor children. the room where key of three clothes was called "Barrel Room." They had plenty children who needed them. In. those days we had plenty fine smart children who would come to school bare and penniless. They were poor but ambitious and the Booker I. saw to it that these poor ambitious children were given a chance. I was one of these children who wanted a chance. I was given a chance and I worked as hard as I studied. My health failed me and I had to stop school. As I recall about my fifteen cents that I had when I entered school, the funny thing I had that fifteen cents when school closed. I was afraid if I spent my fifteen cents, something would turn up that I needed it worse, for, so I held tight to that money.
"I decided to get married. I was only fifteen when I married the first time. I married Henry McKenzie. My life was shocked by a mob who lynched him. A<text not clear> Johnie Siglers was found dead and they suspicioned that my husband did it. They had his trial but the jury split on it. So the side that wanted him hung took him and lynched him.
"I didn't let this coward me down. I decicded to work and try to make a mark in life so that some one would know that I lived and had not lived in vain. Looker T. Washington would go round lecturing to farmers, he would always tell us to bring something to town with us to sell so we could have a little cash to get the things we needed without going in debt for everything. I took this in and profited by it. Then Mr. Washington would teach the farmers to raise plenty food stuff this I did and it meant so much to me. When he would send county agents around I always cooperated with them and I always found that they could help us in our farm problems.
"I made a sad mistake when I married my second husband. We was the type who did. not want anything. His <text not clear> it was poster Simason. We had some land where we were trying to farm. This land was just washing away. I did not know anything about terracing but I did know that if a ditch was dug across the Field. it would present the washing away of all the rich soil. My husband seemed perfectly satisfied about the land washing away. I studied the directions of the wash and I decided we would dig ditched to prevent it. I told my husband, Moster, about what I thought should be done. He cursed me out but I was determined about what I thought was right so I marked the ditch by digging holes along and then argued with Moster until we argued into a fight and then he helped me to dig the ditches. This would happen every spring. An argument, fight and then the ditches. I would rake he ditches and help with all the hard work around the farm for I wanted something. I boarded the teachers, took in sewing and did every thing I could possible do to try to fix up. my little humble home. We had only one room and a dirt floor kitchen. But I had seen over to Tuskegee the nice toilets and I 'wanted one. I wanted a <text not clear> room to<text not clear> I tore down an old shed that we did not need and built a toilet Myself. I took some of the boards and made a partition in my kitchen and made a dinning room. The neighbors saw my toilet and my other fixings around so they followed. I was the first in my community to own a toilet. Before this time we all had thought the woods afforded a good enough place for a natural toilet..
"I kept on trying to make little additions to the home and trying to fix it so it would look attractive and this would make my husband mad. We just could not agree. He treated me so bad that I just went to court and asked for a divorce. Well the court gave him everything, even the forty acres of land we worked together and bought. I did have forty acres of land my father left for me. But I did not have a mule or nothing to start my farm on the following year. But I still remembered, "Delight thyself in the Lord and He shall give thee the desires of thy heart". I still had faith in God.
"I had gone through so much bad treatment from my husband that I had nervous indigestion and the doctor had to put me on malted milk for a long time. Deacons asked my husband why me parted, he said, "She's too damaged high minded. When the She wants too much.
"I had a son in Cincinnati, Ohio. He decided to core down and help me on the farm. This was in 1918. After the ctops were laid, my son Clarence McKenzie went to training camp at Tuskegee Institute. We made eight bales of cotton for which I got forty cents (40¢) a pound. The government gave me $15 for a son and this helped me to pay the debt of $1011.75 and to buy back the forty acres which the court gave my husband. I struggled hard this year to do these things. I did a lots of peddling and working at night. At this time I was so anxious to pay my debts and start fixing up my home that I had one cress for Sunday and join to town and one pair of slippers which I bought for 50¢. I went to church and was not shame for I believed so strong that if I delighted in the Lord and His. works that I would have something some day.
"While my son was in training at Tuskegee he met and married Hottie Fostoak, oil. ell queen. She helped me lots at that time. I had someone working on halves and I always carrier good insurance on my little home. When the house burned my insurance was paid.
"Mrs Lanra Daily and Mr. Robert Thurston was demonstrators at this time and is yet. They taught me how to do proper terracing and to plant winter cover crops which has improved my lard so very much. I continued to peddle to help myself so as to keep out of debt. I wanted to but that. insurance into a new home. Mrs Daily made my plans and helped me with the plans for this new home which I am in now. The house cost $2000. The insurance was $1700. I put that $1700 into the house and furnished it and moved into it in 1930. High after this the prices on cotton dropped to five and six cents per pound. This left me with a big debt. I had another hard struggle, but I kept faith. In 1933 the government had the farmers to plow up their cotton and was allowing 10¢ pound and estimating a half bale to the acre. I had twenty acres planted. So I pulled through that dark spot. I have gladly followed the clans of the government every since. It has helped me to have clear to dyy my one hundred and <text not clear> acres of land. The government is making it possible for us to enjoy electricity and many system of running water. God bless the <text not clear>. <text not clear> too evelt gave farmers rural delivery and then comes <text not clear> and gives the farmer the joy of bright lights and running water. And <text not clear> has helped us in so many ways that we no longer feel forgotten. If I did vote I surely would vote for Poosevelt to be president another term.
"Well, I just keep on thanking God for letting me see the most of the desires and enjoy the things I use to long for. I recoumend anyone to delight in the ways of the Lord and He will surely give you the desires of your heart.
I should think Mrs. Mary Simpson certainly has the desires of her heart. As well as pretty outside and attractive, her home is very attractive inside. It is on the farm but as modernly and attractively furnished as any city home.
In the living room is a beautiful mchorary living room suite, a victrola, a library table on which sets an attractive table lamp. On the mantle are two very pretty vaser. A pretty vase sets on the victrola. A large what-not rack in a corner with what-nots on. the shelves, a smoking stand and a magazine rack, pretty scrim curtains with drapes and everything harmonizes beautifully in her rooms. All the floors are varnished and I base becoming floor coverings.
The guest bedroom has an oak vanity bedroom suite, white curtains with pastel floral drapes and becoming wall pictures and vases.
The other two bedrooms are lovely furnished with maple furnishings.
The dinning room has a rich oak dining room suit. consisting of nine pieces. A. very attractive and gorgeous oblong mirror hangs over the buffet.
The bathroom is furnished in white.
The kitchen is very attractive. The wood and coal stove is soft green and yellow. convenient shelves and a cabinet add to the convenience and neatness of this kitchen. A pair of snow white curtains with three rows of varicolored braid hung at the two windows.
The pantry is inviting. Every shelf in this spacious pantryis fillet with canned fruits and vegetables, <text not clear> and jams.
Excellent taste is shown through bout t is lovely farm home in Color, harmony and furnishings.
Mrs. Mary Simpson is now one of the highly respected citizens of Lacan county. She is active in religious and civic organizations. The is president of the Woman's district convention of the Ebenezer Association. She says she is happy. She says she always felt that people should live to be known, to be useful and to be looked on as one worthy of being an example for someone else.
Susie R. O"Brien,
March 15, 1939.
Mrs. Ira Reynolds,
Uniontown, Alabama.
It was a bright warm day in March when all the world longed to be out of doors enjoying the sunshine. Ira was taking advantage of the unusual weather and as I came around the side of the house I found her weeding her small vegetable garden. A brood of young chickens picked busily among the tender new plants. Ira tossed a bit of rook in the midst of the brood scattering them in every direction and sending them cheeping loudly back to the mother hen tied by the leg in the next yard. Attracted by the noise a woman appeared in the door of the next house and said "I've got the hen tied up it looks like you would'nt kill the little chickens". "But I will" replied Ira, "if you dont keep 'em at home, if you think I buy seed and break my back workin' a garden for your chickens to scratch up you are mistaken'! The woman did not reply and Ira straightened up slowly and placing her hands on her back said as she dusted the soil from her fingers and leaned the hoe against the side of the house, "I'm gettin' too old to bend over like this, I declare you just cant have nothin' for the neighbors pesky chickens. I do so love to have my own garden, these store bought vegetables dont taste like nothin', now I had a nice mess of volunteer mustard out of my garden today for dinner and they just melted in my mouth they was so good. I love flowers too but as I was sayin' you cant have nothin' much for the pesky chickens, they dont bother the bulbs much, thank goodness, so I have lots of them. These is the sweetest little things you ever smelled" she said stooping to pick a blossom "here pin it on your bosom it'll make you smell sweet". The yard was swept as clean as a broom could make it here and there were clusters of yellow daffodils, narcissus and jonquils in full bloom. As we came around toward the front of the house Ira said, "come on in and rest yourself I'm just plum tuckered out. I hope you will excuse the way I look but I been workin' in the garden all mornin' and I declare I do look a sight" she said brushing off her sweater and smoothing back the loose strands of hair. Ira is a woman of <text not clear> medium height, she has a very heavy suit of hairsprinkled with gray which she wears parted in the middle and done in a heavy knot low on the back of her neck. She has a pleasant face with twinkling gray eyes and a broad smile which displays the one remaining lower tooth left in her otherwise toothless gams. She wore a clean faded print dress and an old brown sweater worn through at the elbows. "Come on in the house" she said, inviting me into the small entrance hall and opening a door leading into a bedroom. I followed her and found myself in a very cozy room, Ira drew up a rocking chair close to the dying embers in the grate and busied herself plumping up the seat cushions and straightening the old fashioned tidy on the back of the chair takling all the while. " I declare I hope you will excuse this room, I've been so busy trying to get my garden worked out I haven't even took time to wash up my dinner dishes, see they are all piled up on the table" she said nodding her head toward the open door of an adjoining room where a few dishes stood in neat stacks on a table and a blue enameled oil stove shone like new in the bright sunlight streaming through the open window. The room where we sat was neat and orderly containing two metal beds with thick comfortatbe looking mattresses so high they reached almost to the top of the foot of the bed. making me wonder how Ira managed to climb in at night. In one corner stood an old fashioned bureau and in another the washstand to match with flowered bowl and pitcher. There were several comfortable rockers, each with a patchwork cushion and on the floor were three or four woven grass rugs, "Now dont think you are stopping me from my work" Ira said as she drew her chair up close beside me, plumped up the cushions and made herself comfortable for a long chat,"because if theres anything I do like its company, my, I do get so lonesome when I'm here by myself. I'm just like Papa was, thats his picture "she said, pointing to an enlarged picture of a bearded old. gentleman which hung over the mantel, I guess you dont remember him but he was just like me, had to have somebody to talk to. We been. livin'in this town all our days and. Papa knew everybody, there wasnt nobody he didnt know well enough to stop and talk to. Papa moved here in a covered wagon when he was 'bout ten years old, they settled at Mud Creek. He wanted to study to be a doctor but the war broke out and he had to give it up. I reckon he must of been 'bout twenty years old when he joined the Canebrake Rifles here and left for the war. The second year he was shot in the shoulder and not havin' much attention it got bad and gangrene set in, he came mighty near losin' that arm. Seein' he wasnt able to do no fightin' they finally give him a furlough, I think thats what you call it when they let you come home for a while. He had to walk most all the way, and him sick too, when he got to the Alabama River there wasnt no way for him to cross so he just waded right in and swam across with that bad arm too. I tell you Papa had grit, all the men did in them days, but now, shucks, they aint nothin' but softies. And such a disposition as Papa did have, never gettin' upset about nothin', not a one of his five children had one like him. My brother said to me once I declare if I had to choose between Papa's disposition and a million dollars I believe I'd take Papas disposition. Shucks, I said you wouldnt do nothin' of the kind you'd take the million dollars and go right on havin' a bad disposition and take a chance on your money gettin' you by. Papa went through the war and surrendered with his company at Appomattox Courthouse, we had his discharge paper all framed so it wouldnt get tore up, he was always so proud of it. Would you like to see it, and Ira hurried into the next room and came back bringing a neatly framed paper showing that Edward Franklin Gouldman had been honorably discharged from the army at Appomattox Courthouse Virginia. Papa used to talk so much about the time he was in the war " she went on " but I didnt listen much, I wish now I had, but you know how it is when people just keep on talkin' and talkin' about the same thing you get kinda tired of hearin' it. Papa lived to be eighty four years old, he was one of the last of the veterans livin' in town to go, the government give me a headstone for his grave. I used to like to go to church on Memorial Day but I dont go no more, now it makes me too sad.
Papa and Mama were married after the war and settled here, they built a house about a mile from town, the house is still there and ever since then people have called it Gouldman"S hill We dont own the house now though, Papa lost it some way or other. Theres been a lot of changes since them days," Ira said with a sigh, there was eleven of us children but Papa, and Mama raised only five, three girls and two boys, and just two of us livin' now, me and one brother. I was married young, my husband was doin' very well he had a meat market, but he died when he was forty and I've been a widow a long time. Buddie has a store and he is awful good to me. Ofcourse I have four girls but they are all married and have got just about as much as they can take care of, they all have families of their own. They all want me to live with them but I told "em Lor'no, I aint got no idea of livin' with none of you. I'll stay right here in my own house where I can run things like I please without so much bossin' from young folks. 'Course the old house aint what it used to be, it leaks like a sifter but Buddie says he aint got no idea of puttin' out no money on it. I declare I'm just between the devil and the deep blue sea, I need some teeth, as I reckon you've already noticed, and the house leaks so bad and I dont know whether to get the teeth or to have the roof fixed. I've about made up my mind though to go on and get the teeth and let the house leak a while longer. But I'll get the roof fixed some way you just wait and see, Ira said nodding her head wisely, I'll put aside a nickel here and a dime there and before I know it I'll have enough to patch the roof, it happens like that every time I need anything real bad. But it sure makes a sight of work for me when it rains, I was moppin' up water all day yesterday, come on in the other room and I'll show you." I followed her across the small hall into another bedroom, this one was not as cozy as the one in which we had been sitting it was furnished with a white metal bed and a dressing table and washstand which had been painted white, several enlarged photographs with heavy gilt frames hung on the wall. "Now did you ever see such a mess" said Ira, pointing to the spots on the clean bare floor made by the leaky roof, and one of the rooms I cant use at all it leaks so bad. Well folks cant have every thing they want in this old world" she said cheerfully as she led the way back to the room where we had been sitting. Just as we were seated comfortably again there was a knock at the door and Ira said "mercy sakes, more company, when it rains it pours." She smoothed her hair and dress and went to the door to admit the visitors. " Come in" " she said " I"ve already got company but theres always room for more." Two young women followed Ira in, one of them carrying a sample case, she sat down and began to open the case. "Sakes alive " said Ira throwing up her hands " I cant buy nothin' today. Dont get so excited Miss Ira said the woman, I dont want to sell you anything I want to give you something, now the company I work for wants all their customers to have a sample of their products, and its mighty good stuff too. Which would you like to have, some vanilla to make a cake or something to beautify yourself? " Oh my, I'd rather have something to beautify me" said Ira as she searched in a drawer and brought out a small bottle. " Here give me a sample of perfume, I do love to smell good. You might laugh at me" she said shaking her finger at us and nodding her head, "but I was a pretty girl once. I"ll show you and she hurried into another room and returned with an old-Fashioned photograph, carefully posed showing bare neck and shoulders above a lacey scarf, light hair piled high and done in many curls. She held it up proudly for us to see," yes thats me but you wouldnt know it to look at me now, would you,?" The sales woman finished filling the bottle and gave it to Ira who removed the stopper and inhaled deeply saying"my that smells good, I do love things to pretty me up. I'll save it to use when I'm dressed up" she said as she put it carefully away in a drawer. The sales women rose to leave and Ira followed them to the door, hurrying back she resumed the conversation, " I was right young when this picture was taken and if I do say it myself I was pretty " she said replacing the photograph in the small mahogany chest from which she had taken it. I put all my little keepsakes in this box, but land sakes whats the use, nobody will care a thing about them when I'm gone. Now here's a picture of Papa when he was young " she said rummaging in the box, " and heres Mama's obituary, somebody has tore it half in two " she said unfolding an old newspaper clipping, you see the girls don't care about these things like I do. I visited with one of them last summer, of course they was nice to me. Bob, my son-in-law always puts his arm around me and kisses me just like I was his own mother, but it just ain't like bein' in your own house. While I was there we all took down with the flu, well we had a time, there wasn't nobody to look after me so they bundled me up and sent me to the hospital in the ambulance, you know I can hear the whistle on that thing now. There I was goin' to the hospital with not a single loved one to hold my hand. My daughter said afterwards though that I wasn't all by myself 'cause the undertaker was sittin' right at my head lookin' down in my face, so after that I thought I'd be better off at home. But I did have a nice visit last summer, my two grand-daughters took me to Texas to see my husband's folks, and what a time we did have. The car was old and broke down two or three times but we made it allright. The night before we left I was so excited I couldn't sleep, early nex' moruin' they come for me and I got in the car and was sittin" all comfortable with my suit case at my feet when one of the girls said, Grandma, we got a gun in one of them pockets well I started gettin' out right now and I said well if we are goin' to such a wild country that we have to tote a gun I just ain't a'goin. So one of 'em took the gun on the back seat with her and while I wasn't exactly satisfied I felt better and I'm glad we didn't have to use it. Both of the girls work and they gave me the trip but the young folks today ain't what they were in my day, they are so prissy and I don't like it. Now one of them wrote me not long ago and said she thought a friend of hers was goofy and I sat right down and wrote her back and told her I thought she was goofy herself. Well I'm sixty six years old and times have changed a lot since I was young. Land sakes, do you have to go? I had just started to talk good, my, how time does fly " she said as she followed me to the door. Please come again, I do so love company. I might have my new teeth by the next time you come" she called as I reached the gate.
Annie L. Bowman
Escambia County
December 14. 1939 Mr. and Mrs w. D. Owens Atmore Ala.
The sun shone down warmly with its glancing shades of purple, bright yellow, and green on the wide Avenue of oak tree trees, as Mrs W.D. Owens came to meet me, her arms holding a load of oak wood for the kitchen stove. She says, we could go into the parlor, but I am so busy, we will just viset here in the kitchen. You know to-morrow is Thanks-giving and the children will be home, however I am saving my turkey until Sunday. Mr. Owens will be home then, you are doubly welcome for the one of the greatest joys I get from life is the meeting of people and making friends. I like to know people, for I always find something in every person to admire, something to cherish, something to commend. Certainly all the people I meet are not perfect; but if all folks are of the same pattern as those I meet from day to day, it must be a pretty fine old world. I love life, cheifly because I love people. The more people I know, the happier I am.
Mrs. Owens was born in Chipley Florida, a ministers daughter. After finishing high school in Chipley Florida, she graduated at the normal school in Tallagassee Florida and taught school until she married in 1900. They have six children, three girls and three boys. The three girls have finished college. Willie Dosia, the oldest girl is married. She lives and her little four years old live at home with hermother. Patsy the platinum blonde so much like her mother, was a stenographer before she married her rich employer. Kathline is a teacher in the Graceful Florida high school. Of her boys: Dowling, who died at the age of sixteen. Chester is in his first year at Auburn and Jesse is still in Atmore High school.
Mrs. Owens says I am very disappointed this Thanksgiving. It is the first time Mr. Owens business has ever kept him away from home so much,(especially on this day) since we were married. He has planned to be with us on Sunday, because he never misses church here if he can possibly help himself. I dont believe you can ever come again in the same community after once loosing out. I believe you will have to hunt a new location, even after you have built up your home and hate to give it up.
As we continue the conversation you find she is a very religeous woman who is a member of the methodist church, not only a member but a great worker and has brought up her childrn to never shirk their religeous responsibilities.
She speaks of their former years of prosperity. I never did such menial work as getting in wood before the depression, but we are blessed with plenty of oak wood from this avenue of oak trees you came through to get here. They are so big and old, limbs are continually falling and this makes all the wood we can use. This wood box was here when we bought the place (pointing to a huge covered and painted box that would hold at least a half cord of wood) and laughingly said, as one of the school boys visiting in the home said to Jesse: if mamma had such a wood box at home and asked me to fill it, why I would actually faint. I never let it get entirely empty.
Willie Dosia a tall, dark, slinder, haughty looking girl leading her little daughter by the hand came in from the post office. Mamma I bet daddy will come home to-morrow or we would have heard from him. I didn't get a thing at the office but this old magazine and she nodded to me as she passed through the door. Presently she returned and said, I'm making my home here now until my husband gets to work again, when that will be I don't know. I know mamma. needs me as daddy is away so much, but I had rather be in my own home, the more there is in the family the more work is to be done and I feel like she would be better off alone. I think I'll leave baby with you and go over and fix aunt Hattie for the night.
She swished out through the door and her mother says, dont pay any attention to the way she acts for she is sorely troubled and feels she is a burden to us. We do try to make her feel welcome, but she is bitter. Her husband isn't much force. Its an ill wind that blows nobody good and I think helping her aunt, who has been sick two months makes her feel a little more worthy.
A car drove rapidly up to the door and there was a joyful meeting of this short stocky man of sixty five years and his little blonde wife, who looks not much older than her daughters. She busied herself with basting the turkey saying, I'll cook it now you are at home. Here is a lady a lady to see you, take care of her while I fix up the turkey. Why sure I am never to tired to talk to the ladies. Says he.
Mr. Owens came to Atmore in 1915 and bought the old W. M. Carney home with its forty acres surroundings. This big two story building is situated one half mile west from the business section of Atmore. Across the railroad on highway 31. A big avenue of trees on the front give it a shady sombre look. This walk extends from the L. and N. railroad to the door a quarter of a mile. Mr. Owens was reared in Chipley Florida, he and his wife attended the same high school. His father, being a turpentine before him, naturally he grew up with this work in view He has been a turpintine operater all his life. He is a member of the methodist church and has contributed heavily in this and was one of the promoters of the beautiful methodist church here. As one man expressed it, even if he is a little wild at times you can always find he and his family in the amen corner on every Sunday morning. He is a member of the Carney Masonic Lodge and is a free giver to all charitable organixations. He recently gave five hundred dollars($500) to the welfare for the purpose of keeping the sewing room open.
When he located in Atmore he erected two naval stores mills ome in Escambia Ala. the other in Escambia Florida each within a nadius of twenty five miles of Atmore. With the money he already had made before coming and these two stills made him a rich man and an important leader in the community in all the civic actions and participation in public affairs. His income is undetermined, although it run up into the thousands annually.
He says, to be home on Thanks-giving has caused me no end of inconveniences and has knocked into some of my financial plans as well, but I couldn't let down the wife. After I lost out here during the depression. It was hard to adjust my self to anything. After prices in turpintine dropped so low, and my first pay roll money was short I saw it was useless to carry on and I sold my business at a great loss of some Fifty thousand dollars. It was better this way than to get deeper in debt.
I then drifted about looking for something to cling to there was nothing in view. There was a big land deal on a corporation buying up the Southern States Farms. Well I bit and these fellows cleaned me out of ten thousand dollars (10.000) deal. I sat down for awhile worrying, when an idea came to me of putting in a meat market here in Atmore. I worked this for a year and got farther in debt every day. I finally played Santa Claus, distributing what I had in stock to the poor, paid the rent, burnt the credit book, locked the doors and went home a failure. I didn't know how to do a thing but turpintine. I thought of the great hopes my father and mother had for me, but high school was enough for me I wouldn't budge an inch toward college talk. My mother had mapped out a ministers life for me. Still I couldn't see how I had missed any thing by being A ministers, business was my aim in life and I just would not be whipped. So I set my brain to working again. It sounds easy doesn't it. Just try it for your self.
He tells you, that out of a clear sky comes the Kraft paper mill to Mobile and he immediately investigated this and secured a contract with the firm to get out timber for the mill. Re bouhht or leased all the timber in Baldwin and Escambia county he could get and has made as much if not more than he ever did in naval stores. But th_s keeps him away from home most of the time.
Mrs. Owens says, we kept out of the red pretty well during the depression. willie Docia got a place as book keeper with the Red Cross, Patsy had a good position as stenographer. The smaller children and I went to work sold milk and butter and I also made sandwiches for a local drug store. But there was nothing so bad as when I found my oldest boy dead in bed one night while I was alone. If a thing happens to you like that and you arn't already a Christian you will be before the funeral is over.
He tells you that with his paper mill contract, he also recently has bought a big interest in some oil wells in Louisianna and has built and fixed his offices to begin operation by the first of January, and will probably move his for my family there.
He says, he believes the depression was caused by greed forgetting their fellow men end God in the pursuit of this worlds goods. And the defense of the depression therfore, is not a problem for the government or the army, it will mot be solved on foreign soil. It is up to us, as individuals citizens On what we do depends the future of the depression. I am asked How shall we build the world after the depression and I might be justified in saying that we shant rebuild it but shall just middle along. However the fact is that rebuilding the world is a job for which we are not hardly qualified. When we knock down our houses we can rebuild them; that is about as much as we can claim.
I like to do my own planning and drive my own bargains even if I do get left or fail so many times. Men are gamblers by nature. Why not direct it into orderly, supervised channels. Well you must admit if you recieved a telegram stating you had won a fortune you would be some what surprised. Thats exactly what happened to me and if you don't believe me, come to Louisanna to my oil wells and see the gushers.
Mr. Owens says, he has had many ups and downs in business, but the worst he ever did during the hard times was trying to farm a little on his forty acre farm with a mule and negro man. Well that beat him how any body could wrestle a living out of a farm is more than he could see. He didn't know which to pity the most, he, the mule or old Sam. But he knows he will never try that again.
He believes in the good old days when a man managed his family, did his own thinking, educated his own children, clinging to his own church, giving charity to all that is in need. And sometimes I believe in the negros eleventh commandment. Do others or they will do you.
He still holds the highest respects of all he comes in contact with. If he should move to his new place of business. He will be missed socially as well as financially.
