SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE: How Mr. W. S. McLure came to be in the real estate business.
Date of First Writing	February 16, 1959
Name of Person Interviewed	W. S. McLure (white)
Street Address	West Main Street
Place	Union, S. C.
Occupation	Real Estate Man
Name of Writer	Caldwell Sims Union, S. C.
Name of Reviser	E. F. Kennedy
W. S. McLure lives in a beautiful home on South Street, which he owns. It has an attractive yard and the house is well kept and commodious in its appointments. He has an easy, smooth-running car. His other property, which is dotted all over Union, is also well kept and his rental houses are attractive to the eye of the beholder. In his developing and buying of land in the city limits he has always tried to improve and beautify the landscape and also to see that his renters kept up their premises.
Mr. McLure has developed North Church Street by building a group of four-room houses on it. The lawns are planted and kept attractive all the year round. He always protects the trees that nature has planted on his property all over the town, often adding shrubs or more trees where shade and beauty are needed. He has his houses well lighted, and adequate plumbing installed in them.
On historic "Tosch" Branch is a well kept valley, known as McLure Bottoms, The native growth on the branch through the McLure property has been protected and remains undisturbed. Where the branch is traversed by fashionable South Street a portion of it is a beauty spot the entire year round. The bottoms are planted in a forage crop mixed with vetch and lespedeza, thus furnishing a picture of charm and prosperity to the eye throughout all seasons.
Mr. McLure's own account of his career is as follows: "My father, J. W. McLure, came to Unionville from Chester, S. C., when he was only eighteen years old. His uncle, John McLure, ran a mercantile business on Main Street at the site now occupied by Wright-Baker. He took Father in with him and this was Father's first business enterprise. I grew up here.
"When I was a small boy there were only four buildings on Main Street, that are still standing now. They are the Hob Nob Restaurant, Wright-Baker's, the Flynn Home, and further down the street the building which now houses the Arthur Stores.
"As a youth, I felt within me a desire to be something and had an idea of owning a home and real estate, some future day. I wanted to be what people would call a good citizen, a builder and one whom my associates would look on with admiration.
"My first work was with my father in his general merchandise store known es the firm of Rice and McLure. It was an old frame building which stood on Main Street at the site of our present marble yard. I stopped school and began to work here when I was between fourteen and fifteen years old. Father paid me $100 a year, and I saved some money from this salary. Of course I lived at home with him and paid nothing for room and board, I had ambition to save some, and I have had a desire to have something ever since. I enjoyed this work and received valuable business training under Father.
"I desired more education. So, after a year in the store, Father sent me to Charleston to the Holy Communion Church Institute, now Porter Military Academy. I studied there during 1882 and 1883. Some of my classmates have become distinguished. They are General Charles P. Summerall, of the Citadel, Charleston; Philip H. Gadsden of Philadelphia, and others who are well known in this country today. At the end of the year I left Charleston and returned to Union, again working for Rice and McLure. I stayed with the firm until they went out of business in 1889.
"Father then went into business as J.W. McLure, Agent for W. H. Roseborough of Chester, S. C. He ran a general mercantile business where the Rialto Theatre now is. He remained there until 1891. I continued working for my father and made $50 a month, which is the most I ever made as a salesman. By this time I had a wife and two children. All of my earnings went for the upkeep of my family. My wife became ill and lived only three years, I had heavy doctor's bills and other expenses, which I did not get cleared up for several years afterwards.
"My brother, J. Fred McLure, studied law in Chester under his cousin, Joe McLure, and was admitted to the bar in Columbia. When he returned from Chester, he and I bought Father's business from the creditors and we ran it together until 1920. We used my meagre savings to buy our small stock of goods. My brother gradually paid me back what he owed me and we were on a fifty-fifty proposition. We made some money each year and increased our stock of goods at the beginning of each year.
"All this time we were making money on our side lines. I began my first dabbles in real estate. I sold coal; bought cotton seed meal and hulls on the side. And brother did some law practice on the side. During this time we bought and paid for the building in which we were doing business. We also built another building, which is known as the Hob Nob Restaurant. Before that we had built the store back of the Hob Nob.
"However, 1920 found our mercantile firm a failure; so we went into bankruptcy. Brother Fred bought the stock and re-opened as J. F. McLure. When we were together, we were known as J.F. and W. S. McLure. Now Fred had complete ownership of the store, and I gave my time to the real estate business. I had been active in the real estate business since 1914, and I organized "The McLure Realty Company", a corporation of which I am now the president and treasurer. Since that time I have gone on in the even tenor of my ways, slowly building houses, principally on a cash basis, very little credit at any time. I have found in my experience that the four-room house is the most practical house to rent in Union. I own a good many in a nice section of town that I rent by the month.
"During the period that my brother and I were in the mercantile business, and I in the realty business, I was a director in the Citizens Bank, from the time of its organization. For eighteen years I was a member of the Commission of the Light and Water Plant of Union. During this period much building and development has gone on in Union, and property has increased in value."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE "BESSIE REED".
Date of First Writing	January 9, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Bessie Reed (Negro)
Place and Address	Carlisle, South Carolina
Occupation	Practical Nurse and Cook
Name of Writer	Caldwell Sims Union, S. C.
Name of Reviser	
Bessie has downy feather beds, white sheets, embroidered shams for her pillows and embroidered spreads on the two beds in her room. Her walls are pasted with newspaper pictures cut from the "Miami Tribune" Rotogravure section, of screen celebrities. Bessie wears dresses of blue denim and large white aprons with a bow knotted in the back of her plump waiste. Usually a white kerchief vocers her entire head and ears. A single earring dangles from one ear.
I ain't never see'd no 'oman dat wuz no miller, but me, and I ain't never heer'd of no 'oman runnin' a water mill. Who sed anything 'bout wimmens in Kerlile (Carlisle) runnin' dem? White folks does git the mos' curious ideas when de notion strikes dem. Cose I is heer'd dat 'way back yonder, de Lawd only does know when, dat all de mills wuz down on the rivers. As fer me I ain't never fooled around no rivers in my life, kaise I ain't got no time fer no water. Who ever heerd of wimmens paddlin' around runnin' water mills, I sho' ain't.
When I wuz born it wuz down on Mr. 'Liphus Lyles Stokes' place. Ev'ybody calls dat "Tucker Town" now, Mr. Aughtry Stokes stays in de big house. He draps in 'round Kerlile ev'y week or so. I sees him myself. Ma and Pa had a house on did side of "Tucker Town". Ma and Pa allus said "Marse 'Liphus", But dey won't no slaves. Slaves had done passed. I is around fifty now, somethin' mo' or less. Jes' here recent is niggers gittin' perticler 'bout dey ages. Den dats white folks dat's er gettin' dem on to dat.
H'it wuz fo' of us chilluns to play aroun' de yard. 'Member dat I had three little brothers. I cannot near 'member all that we done, it done been so long and I had been drug around so much 'til my mem'ry done got throwed away, or sumtin. Us lived good tho', I see a hard time now. Don't see how chilluns does these days. Dey even has a hard livin' now. I ain't got no chilluns. When me and my three brothers wux chilluns we had a easy fat time. All good white folks took care of their han's way back thar. Mr. 'Liphus sho took care of Pa and Ma and us too. I ain't so old, but it makes me feel old and feeble to drap my mind way back dat fur.
Pa farmed for Mr. 'Liphus. Ma said he had it tight and rugged, but she staid up to the big house, and when she was not dar she wuz in our cabin with us. Pa died when I wuz small and I never got no educatin much, kaise Ma said gals did not need to know nothin' but sech things as wimmem followed 'round the house. Now ev'ybody struggles to get their chilluns to school. Ah ain't never worried 'bout that, an' I gits along jes' as well as these Kerlile niggers dat is been to school so rotten much. I can boat all of 'em cookin' and I knowns how to nurse the white folks. De white folks calls me a reg'ler nigger, and dat makes me feel real proud of myself.
I lives clean like my Ma did and I keeps my house jes' as clean as I does any white 'Oman's. Dat keeps me in practice. I washes and starches my clothes ev'y week. I puts my pillows and my two feather beds out to air ev'y fair Wednesday. 'Bout three or fo' times ev'y year I takes the tick covers off'n my feather beds and my mattresses and washes them. It ain't nary a bed bug in my house and it ain't gwine to be none dar either. I sets right over dar in dat chair by dat window and makes my quilts, puts frills on my curtains and 'broders (embroiders) my bed spreads. I likes clean beds wid pretty quilts and spreads. Ev'y Sad'day sees me scourin' my board floors and white washin' my hearth wid white mud from the Kerlile spring.
Look up thar on them rafters and see them star patterns and them scallop cuts. I keeps fresh papers to put up new cuts when them thar git yaller. On Sad'day evenin's I heats my comb and uses my 'Poro' to comb out my hair straight for dat night and Sunday when I 'tends Jeter's Chapel. I greases all through the winter wid mutton tallow to keep my face and the skin on my hands smooth. It sho' is hard to do wid so much washin' an' scrubbin'. If you don't keep clean and have pretty hands nobody won't buy no meal from you. I lives dat way from day to day and I has done it all my lift. I don' let no dirty, shiftless, and triflin' no'count niggers come in my house and set on by beds and chairs. I allus bees sumtin myself! Hit's 'ristocratic niggers in Kerlile jest like it's 'ristocratic white folks here too.
When Pa died Ma sent me out nursin' white folks chilluns! She made a leave home clean and tidy. If I come in at night smearched up she sho' did give me a round and she never would let me be keerless. No sir, I sho' can't remember who was the furst white lady I nursed for. But all my life 'til I married the first time. I nursed white folks chilluns. Then come my turn at married life. Since that time I has nursed ailin' and sick white folks. Somethin' jest give me a hand at nursin' white folks, I do not know what it was, but I sho' got the hand. Dats how I lived, nursin' the white folks and dey chilluns. When I was a gal and nursed the little chilluns, I sho' had it easy, kaise ev'y time dem chilluns et why I et too. When my clothes got frayed de lady of the house give me some more. At night when I did not stay in the "big house" I went home to my Ma. I never knowed nothin' 'bout no rugged times till I played fool and took a black man to live wid. And if I had had a mite of sense I would a jest stayed on nursin' white folks and eatin dey rations and wearin' dey ole clothes; kaise dey was far better'n any dat black man ever fetched to me from the sto'.
Dat fust man I marr'ed wuz black as dat chimney back over dar, Heyward Reed was his name. He was a full-grown man lots older than I wuz. We got marr'ed one Fourth of July at a bid break-down. He had been steppin' out wid me some time, but I never had been to no frolic wid him till dat night. I never lef' home wid no aims to git married, kaise I was a nursin' the purtiest lil' white gal a year and a half old and I wuz sho' gittin three good meals a day and her Ma was giwin' me nice clothes to wear. But me and Hayward went to Mr. Oxner's barn to dat breakdown, and I often sets yet, and it runs thru my mind like dis, it sho' wuz a breakdown for dis fool nigger.
De night run on, and Heyward kep' on a bringin' me some red lemonade and I drunk hit till my head started gwine round. Den' Heyward tuck me out into the cool night air and he rid me a right good piece in a buggy he had done borrowed. We stopped at Mr. Aughtry's house and Heyward say "Bessie, I done fetched you up here so as Mr. Aughtry could marry us. I needs a woman like you, Bessie, and I sho' is going to make life fine for you so you won't have to wear yourself out a-nursin' white chilluns no mo!" I never had no mind for nothin' and afo' I know'd it Mr. Aughtry said "Now you is man and wife". From dat very minute on my whole life changed. I hadn't nursed two weeks atter dat 'fo Heyward done gone and told de white folks he needed me to work in his watermelon patch, and day 'scused me from the rest ob dat week. Den I had to cook dat blackman's cornbread and salad far him. Dat had to go on ev'y day. Time to gather crops come around and he went up to the big house and he told them he needed me all the time, and I never knowed nothin' about it till Mistus come one morning and said "Well, Bessie, I sho' hates you got married and can't work no more", I told her I was gwine on working, and she 'lowed, "Heyward is done axed fer you and, Bessie, you know that you are his wife now, and you must make your husband a good wife and help him with his crop." From den on I was jus' a wages hand fer years. Heyward lived wid me till he lef' me about 30 years. He said I never had no mind for nothin' but jest settin' up with white folks. We wuz working wid Mr. Will Jeter then. Miss Maggie wanted me to help wid her chilluns and I told her I would. Heyward didn't like dat, but I laid my foot down on it dat I was not gwine to work as no fiel'd hand dat year, and Miss Maggie had all dem chilluns to nurse and dress. So I tole dat black nigger dat I was a born nurse and I was not a-goin' into no fiel'! Miss Maggie had done tole me I could let him eat in her kitchen and I knowed that would be a heap better than he could fetch to our'n fer me to cook. But you know dat nigger didn't want to eat in Mr. Will's kitchen. He still wanted me to make him a mess of vittels ev'y mornin' and night at our house. I never done it tho'. A young gal of Mike Dawkins' about three shades lighter than I is, started to fetchin' Heyward milk and cornbread afo' I got thro' wid Miss Maggie's chilluns at night. As I went up the front walk I'd see her slippin' out the back way some nights. When I got inside Heyward be settin' dar a wipin his mouf. I axed him over and over what he doin'! He say, "Jes' lickin' out my tongue, kaise I so hungry and tired waiting fer you to come and fetch my supper, you won't never cook me none, you lazy nigger you". Dat make me so mad when I knowed dat it wuz me dat had fixed fer him yo eat from white folks' table rich rations, and he knowed it too. Dat wuz hard livin' den and I had never been used to havin' no man 'buse atter me. So one night I got in and she wuz leavin'. I walked in and axed him who dat wuz I allus seed leaving my house. He looked up real sly and rech' over and pulled me down to him and say; "Honey, you sho' wuz dreamin' kaise I wuz jes' settin' here a-waitin' on you to come and cook me some cornbread". I felt som'thin' on my mouf wiped my hand across it and seed crums on the back of my hand. Dat made me so mad, I got up off'n Heyward's lap. I reached over and picked up my skillet and lifted it over his head and come down. He ducked his head and I jes grated his shoulder. He run on out'n de door and I hollered and tole him if he ever stuck his black kinky head in it again I would kill him. So dat night atter 30 years he jes' wolked off. He's up in Jonesville now wid a family and dey all is fiel' hands. The rest o' dat year I des worked on fer Miss Maggie. Livin' wuz easy fer me atter Heyward left, but at night I seemed to have a cravin' fer somthin' 'nother dat I never had felt befo'.
Jack Sartor had a mill and he lived wid Mr. Jeter. Jack walked wid a stick and he 'plained mi' ni' all the time wid rheumatiz. So one ev'nin' I tuck some cake home wid me and made some coffee and when I went by Jack's house I tole him to step over my way atter dark, kaise I had sumthin' good fer him. He did, and I never felt lonesome and never had no cravin' fer nothin' no mo. Jack kept on a-cumin. He liked fer me to fetch him things from Miss Maggie's kitchen. He bragged on me, and I had got to whar I helped wid the cookin' kaise the chilluns had done got too big to nurse, and her cook had a side ailment so much dat she axed me to take her place in de kitchen when she did not get thar. Mr. Will had to have his six o'clock breakfast no mind what come along. Somehow Mr. Will found out about Jack, I never knowed how. He axed me 'bout it and the sweat broke out all over me. But he broke out in a big laff and lowed; "Bessie you is a baitin' dat nigger to marry him". I 'lowed, "Mr Will I aint' never gwine to marry no mo" black men." Mr. Will say: "Why Bessie, Jack, is black as the ace of spades". Well it kept gwine on Jack got down. I nursed him fer 14 years. I got to whar I run his grist mill atter Mr. Will tuck and shot his brains out settin' on his front porch one evenin' late.
All the niggers got to callin' me "Bessie Jack". When Jack got down to whar he couldn't do nothin' but piddle, he got a gasoline engine fer his mill. I run it. We burn't kerosene in it, dat made it easy fer me. Miss Maggie moved up to Kerlile and me an' jack jes' got us a house near the mill. Kaise I had to look atter him, and so we figured dat we had best be wid one another. I never took Jack's name, no mo' dan' his fust one. Now I goes by "Bessie Jack" Reed. Jack died. I lived on in Miss Ida' house. Ev'vy sadday and ev'vy Monday I run that mill. White and black brung their corn to be ground into either meal or hominy. Arthur English wuz my toll man, When the 'pression come on, white folks say dat dey could buy meal and hominy cheaper and git it quicker. Niggers got whar dey couldn't make no corn. Times wuz already tight and wid me dey got rugged. I never had no toll and I couldn't pay Miss Ida no rent. She live up dar in dat big hotel. She knowed I never had no money, so she say, "Bessie, if you will wash the hotel sheets for me I'll let you stay on in my house. So I done up the sheets ev'y other day fer Miss Ida. Aunt Sarah Medlock fetched them from the hotel to me. Aunt Sarah wuz Miss Ida's maid. Aunt Sarah was as old as Miss Ida. Fact is Aunt Sarah say she and Miss Ida had the same birth. Aunt Sarah would wall her eyes and shake dem gold earrings when she talked about Miss Ida. Aunt Sarah never would let nobody talk 'bout Miss Ida, but she would git mad and bless Miss Ids out to her face, and 'low, "Bessie, I ain't never gwine back up to dat hotel, kaise Miss Ida too demandin' an' it aint' nobody ken' please her no mo'. Den I look up at Aunt Sarah and say, "You says Miss Ida gittin' mean? Well, she gittin' old enuf to be mean, and you been up dar long enuf anyway". Wid dat Aunt Sarah would get up out'n her chair and say. "Bessie Jack, who is you, nothin' but a black nigger, ignant at dat, an' you known nothin' 'bout Miss Ida, and if I hears you say anything 'bout her I is sho' gwine to tell her and she'll have the chief come down here and git you, you hear me?" Wid' them words, Aunt Sarah want toddlin' off on her stick toward the hotel. I watch and seed her gwine in de side door next to Miss Ida's room. I set and study and think how easy Aunt Sarah lived. She and Miss Ida both so old dat dey set and fuss all the time while she fixin' Miss Ida's hair. Aunt Sarah wo' the prettiest earrings and a big gold ring. Her hair wuz white and her skin wuz black as my fust husband's. Dat make dem gold jewels shine out on her. De niggers were all scared of Aunt Sarah kaise she wuz so big and strong. She would hit anybody wid dat heavy stick dat sasses her. Miss Ida give her the stick when Mr. Smith died.
1937 come along and Miss Ida had done tuck down wid a stroke. The banks here and in Union had busted. Ev'ybody said Miss Ida never had no mo' money. Folks drapped off from comin' to the hotel except at night. Aunt Sarah tole me dat Miss Ida gwine to close de dining room and let Ike and Cornelia go. Andrew had done gone caise nobody never rid on the train and had valises to tote no mo'. I got to whar I never washed sheets but twice a week. My mill wuz a settin' up rustin', so one day a junk man come along and I sold him the whole think to him fur three dollars cash. Dat ev'nin' Aunt Sarah come by wid some sheets and said, "Bessie, when you gits then sheets washed, come and fetch them to Miss Ida, my backhurts me too bad for me to be aclim'ins dat hill wid a passel o' hotel sheets." I wondered who gwine to wait on Miss Ida when Aunt Sarah's back give out sho' 'nuff. I knowed dat all the white folks in Kerlile wuz livin' hard but the mail rider and the folks dat had headed de banks, dey peered to be livin' sweller. In times pas' it ain't no folks nowhars dat had things as easy as dese here Carlile folks has. Us lives to ourselves and let other folks be.
All dat done gone from dese parts now. Wid' the two Banks bustin' here and den then Banks in Union, lef' our white folks flat. Folks goes to Florida and the mountains in cars now instead of on de train. All de roads done been paved. Dat done lef' our hotel plumb behind. Them cars don't make no stop dis' side of Spartanburg gwine north, and dey rolls right up on Columbia goin' south. Ain't nothin' lef' for Kerlile now. Of course, us still eats, but den us allus did do dat, kaise we raise plenty on the flat fiel's. Us sho' ain't got no money. I lives a leetle harder now, but it ain't rugged like it was when I had a black man. If niggers ud let white folks have dey way; de niggers would do better, or dats my 'sperience.
One day Aunt Sarah took down wid her stomach, She hollered and woke Net up one mornin' 'bout 3 o'clock. They used all the home remidies on her, but Aunt Sarah fell in a trance. Dat mornin' I went over to the hotel to fix Miss Ida's breakfast. She never et none, but drink her coffee and set dar and shake her head, and then she say, "Bessie go see 'bout Sarah", Then I come back at fo' o'clock and told her Aunt Sarah done fell in a trance an' seein' angels, Miss Ida say, "Well, Sarah is dying". Aunt Sarah died the nex' morning at fo' o'clock befo' day broke, Dey buried her at Jeter's Chapel on the third day, Mi' ni' all de white folks went, Net put one Miss Ida's black wool dresses on Aunt Sarah, She tuck off'n her earrings and her gold ring, Dey fetched them over to Miss Ida, When Miss Ida seed 'em she broke down and cried so hard dat me and Net broke over too, Miss Ida say, "Net you keep them, I don't want them." Net give one earring to her daughter Matt, and t'other one she give me. Here it is in my lef' ear. It done cured my neuralgy. Matt got hers on, and she got one fer her other ear, but it done tunr't brass. Net wears her Ma's ring on her middle finger.
Miss Ida son't to Union and got a bunch of flowers from the shop up dar on Main Street, whar they beeps flowers in the winter. They put then on Aunt Sarah's grave, but nex' mornin' the frost doen kilt them. Aunt Sarah's grandchilluns and the ladies of the African Aid made some red flowers with paper and got pine needles and put them on her grave. The pine needles lasted the longest. I stayed wid Miss Ida, but dey preached de funeral fer two hours and half in de church befo' dey went to the graveside. I sho' hated to miss it, but me and Miss Ida couldn't keep our eyes from getting' wet all day long. I cooked and waited on Miss Ida fer two years. Den Miss Johnnie, her husbands cousin, loss her plantation and house, so Miss Ida took Miss Johnnie and her husband in wid her. She let dm stay dar, and don't charge dem no house rent and dey boards her.
I nursed up in Union on the WPA a year. That lady wanted me to nurse white folks dat never had no quality, so I quit and come back to Kerlile. Arthur English helped me clean out my mill house and put up a partition to make two rooms. I opened the fireplace in it and I have lived here ever since. It belongs to me and I gwine to keep it, and I cooks fer Miss Eva. She gwine to the country on the summer. I gwine down thar every mornin' and cook fer her right on. H'its jes' three miles to walk, but I can make that in an hour and a quarter. I will leave here at five o'clock and git thar in time to git Miss Eva and Mr. Paul they breakfast by six-thirty. I ain't worrin' 'bout makin' my way, kaise it'll be a way."
Bessie has two beds with downy feather beds and white sheets, white spreads and high pillow shams. She gets all the wood from Miss Eva's place free, and he walls are pasted with newspaper pictures of the celebrities from the "Miami Tribune". Bessie wears dresses of blue denim and large white aprons tied with a long string making a bow in the back. She usually keeps a white kerchief over her head completely covering her hair and ears. One earring hangs out from under the cloth.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE "Singin' Praises Dats My Life, Lawd".
Date of First Writing	February 17, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Emma Sanders, (Negro)
Street Address	#1 E. Henrietta Street
Place	Union, S. C.
Occupation	Cook
Name of Writer	Caldwell Sims,
Union, S. C.
Name of Reviser	J. J. Murray
Spartanburg, S. C.
Emma is about sixty-five years old and lives in a four-room house with her husband, Mango (or "Luck") Sanders. He is a self-supporting Negro. Their house is unusually comfortable for a darkey's house. The floors are carpeted with faded carpets given Emma by the Jennings and Bolton families. It is put down in pieces and the pieces do not match in color or pattern. Each room has an old laundry heater in it, and the kitchen has an open fireplace with a pot crane. A wood range is also used. Emma says that "Luck" fetched that in. "Luck" trucks and butchers, and he has plenty to eat.
Two nieces from the country live with "Luck" and Emma and attend the Sims High School. These girls wash, iron, cook, and clean for their room and board. Emma had a light stroke last year and now she just does light jobs. She visits and laughs and goes to Zion M. E. Church and to St. Paul's, now known as the "Busted Chapel".
"Lawd, Honey, I wuz born down on Mr. William Tucker's place, I thought ev'ybody knowed dat. Him and Mr. Epps Tucker wuz two cousins. Mr. Epps never had no fine house like Mr. William did, Mr. William built hisself a mansion, dat he sho did. Honey, aint you never seed Mr. William's house whar' Miss Ada lived even arter she married Mr. Garrett? God bless her sweet soul, she sho' is one fine white lady dat dis nigger will love to her dyin' day, yes, Lewd, dat I will. I went by Tucker from de very fust day I wuz born till 'Luck' came along and married me. Jesus, how I would like to see my old home. 'Ada' on de Seaboard Airline Railroad, wuz named fer Miss Ada Tucker, Mr. William's sister.
"Mr. William never married. He had two places; his upper place and his lower place, but dey jined one another. His house is on de upper place. The lower place he called the 'Holmes Place' because old Dr. Holmes once owned it. The road from Santuc is called the 'Old Otterson Fort Road'.
"All de time I lived on dat place I never done nothin' but played wid my rag dolls. I has allus been fat and jolly. Ma used to chafe me fer laughin' out loud when I seed grown folks. Pa worked for standin' wages year in and year out. But when I got about eight years old Pa moved from the Tucker place to the Tom Jeter place. We knows dat now by the 'Dr. Bates' place. Pa kept on workin' dar fer standin' wages, $8. a month and our rations. We never suffered fer a thing in dem days. White folks wuz rich, and dey kept dey hands fat and slick, jes as much as dey did dey hogs and horses.
"We lived here for thirty years. My parents died here and me and Mango Sanders married here. When we moved here Ma sent me to school. I never had been to school a day in my life. 'Members dat fust day in school as well as if hit wuz yestidy. Ma fixed me in a red and white striped candy dress. One of my sisters carried me 'long wid her to school. Honey, I wuz the skeer' des little gal you ever seed. When we got in de school de teacher sed 'Good Morning'. I giggled. She hit a stick on a table and said, 'Set down and stop dat grinnin' at me, you is in school now'. She was old lady Phyllis Jeter's grown gal, and she was mean. I wus allus skeered of her, and I never did take in no learnin'. We set down kaise we had done walked three miles. Ma had done give me a lunch and I thought she tole me to eat it as soon as I got to school. So when I set down I started eatin' dat lunch. De teacher seed me tryin' to git my sister to eat and she hollered, 'Emma git up and go out in dat yard'. As I went by her she lashed me wid a hickory, and I run outen dat door hollerin'. I went on down in de wood and set down on a log, and when I got through hollerin'. I et my lunch and went home.
"Quick as I seed Ma I let out a great bawl. She come atter me and axed me if my sister been fightin' me. I tole her 'No', but de teacher had, and I was not gwine to school no mo. Ma went up to de big house and tole old lady Phyllis how her gal had done me. She had me hold up my arm so old lady Phyllis could see de red mark on it. Old lady Phyllis made a great 'miration over it and low'd dat she gwine to give dat gal a round when she got home.
"I never did much at school but played in the pine wood. But the school whar I went to was in the yard of St. Luke's Church. When I went to school I stayed from nine o'clock until four, but most of the day I spent playing ball or sumtin', kaise I allus made my teacher mad so she would send me out. Jes' de same I has allus been in luck. All de lucks in de Lawd; and all de conducts in us.
"Ole man Alf Wright come to visit my white folks. He lived up in Union. He wuz sun kin to my white folks. When he come down in the country he would stay all summer. He drunk a lot o' coffee. My fust job wuz parchin' and grindin' coffee. I never will fergit it, dat fust money I made. Mr. Wright called ne 'Little Fat Gal', He give me a quarter ev'y Saturday while he wuz down there. I parched dat coffee and turned it wid a crank. When it was done parched I let it cool. While it wuz a coolin' I be out a playin'. Den I come in a grind it up. The coffee mill had a drawer. When dat drawer wuz full I emptied the ground coffee in a wood tub with a top to shut it up with. 'Members it as good as if 'twas dis mornin'. Lawd have Mercy, Jesus, it sho' puts me in de mind of shoutin' when I thinks about dem good olden days, Yes Lawd', it sho' do. Mr. Wright wuz a good ole bachelor. He made me dance for him while he fiddled. He fiddled mi' ni' all his spare time, and dat wuz all de time. Fer dat, he give me a little change, not much. It meant a lot to me den.
"As I growed up, Mr. Wright never cum no mo', and he married and had two chilluns in his ole days. I seed his wife once, she wuz a fine looking white lady wid quality about her.
"Cose growin' up aint nothin' 'cept what all de chilluns does. And I would'n have de time dese here gals has now. Dese here gals does'n know nothin' 'bout a good time. When a boy walks wid em twice, why he's ready to marry. Dat all de sense dey got. Lawdy, I is alluw atter 'em 'bout it, dey don't know no good time. Dey thinks dat dey known what a good time is made fer, but dey sho' don't. Dey don't dance like us did when us wuz young. You never heerd no racket behind us. Dat's all follows dey good time, is a racket. I hates rackets. But I likes good times. Dese gals fools 'round too much and dey gits burnt! Best not to fool 'round too rotten much no time yes dat it is! Dese boys ruin dese gals by doin' things dat the gals thinks dey won't.
"Lawdy, honey, I went to frolics and stayed and danced 'til six in the mornin'. Boys fetched me home in the saddle and dey set behind. Still I kept ahead of 'em. All de gals I run wid done de same way. Now gals can't keep ahead of boys and dey don't have to ride no mules either. Dats only time a boy got his arm around me, den he kept it in de right place. Mango fetched me home from frolics for three years and he never found out nothin' 'bout me. Other boys tried to do the same and dey never made no progress. I aint never found out what Mango's ole mule wuz named. Dat de onliest thing he kept me a guessin' on. You is got to keep dem a guessin', kaise all mens is got a streak of cussedness in 'em.
"Finally, when Mango married me, dey started to callin' him 'Luck'. Dey still calls him dat. His Pa got to callin' him 'Luck' afore he died. I rid all Sanders' (dat what I calls him de moes) old mules 'cep'n dat un in de yard now. I aint never found out what dat mule's name is neither, and I don't believe he knows hisself. Sanders calls him anything come to his mind and dat mule keeps a-gwine on."
Emma sees a large black woman going by and while she is going into her tobacco sack of Golden Grain she hollers," "Big Baby" how you comin' along wid dat supper fer de 'Busted Chapel'?" Big Baby shakes her head and looks belligerently at Emma and exclaims, "Who dat talkin' 'bout our church dat way? Our church is St. Paul's Baptist, and dat is all we gwine to let any nigger call it". The ducks and geese in Emma's yard quack and cackle as "Big Baby" departs. She looked around and said, "All you niggers dat wants a good supper come over around dar tonite." Emma knocks her old cob pipe clean and refills it with fresh Golden Grain that she uses because other kinds of tobacco give her short wind. She studies while she puts her sack away and lights her pipe. Then she drops in to a low tone and says, "I never bothers with no cigarettes, 'Luck' smokes cheap cigars, kaise he thinks he is always 'lucky'."
A gander comes out and begins fighting the drake duck, "Look at dat old gander. He is so mean, and I gits right made at him". She throws a stick of stove wood at the gander that causes him to run to his puddle of water. The ducks go on and all of the geese get in the water. "Look at my geese, they is the prettiest scenery I got. I likes they eyes, so blue. Sanders likes dat big drake kaise he got such a green neck. Sanders 'low dat all dat green make him look like a parr't."
"If I'd let dat nigger he would fetch one of den parr'ts here, but I don't need narry a bird to talk. When its talkin' to do 'round here I'll do it myself." She claps her hands and laughs, "My pipe is gwine good now. Had to beat it like I wuz beatin' a pay tho' afo' it got to gwine good. See my washin'. Rain driv' me to be late wid my washin' dis week".
"Jesus, have Mercy, if there aint 'Big Baby' hangin' her clothes out. Dat supper fer de Busted Chapel mus' not be gwine so hot. Rev. Smith wuz preachin' gwine into five years at Sain Paul's on Wallace Street, over dar by de ice factory. See dat steeple? Well, dat's it. Rev. Smith wuz a fine lookin' black man wid a long twisted moustache. He also had a fine wife and no chilluns. He could allus git the mourners bench so full dat it would creak. His conflagration (congregation) never paid him much. So when he got a call to Spartanburg he 'cided to go at once and told his people. Dey never wanted him to leave Union, so he 'cided dat de Lord meant for him to stay here."
" 'Bout a year had done went by when fer some reason it got to gwine dat Rev. Smith wuz too 'Sporty', His wife never believed it and she wuz fixin' to have her fust baby. But one of Rev. Smith's deacons wuz dat jealous of him, dat he called a deacon's meetin' and dey 'cided dat dey won't gwine to pay Rev. Smith no mo' money. As Rev. Smith won't dar he never got no wind. So he preached on in de name of de Lawd fer another year win out pay. Well you knows how things leaks out. So Spartanburg heerd about it and dey calls Rev. Smith agin. By did time his baby boy is crawlin' and hollerin' fer his cooter bones, and his Pa has done found out dat de Devil is settin' on his pews at Saint Paul's, so he 'cepts de Spartanburg call.
"He preaches his farewell sermon and tells de righteous dat dar is mansions in de sky fer dem, and to dem other niggers has 'bused his name, he points out to dem dat dey shall be burnt in de brimstone and fire thirteen times. Yet dat don't git him no money. So when he goes to Spartanburg he sues Saint Paul's Chapel. Dem lawyers gits a judgement against Saint Paul. Dat been eight years past. Dem niggers aint spent no money on Saint Paul's since. Dey still 'tends church, but dey is lettin' it fall mi. ni. Down. Dey tells dem lawyers dey is busted and brings dem to see dey church in need of repairs. So ever since then the Methodists cals Saint Paul de 'Busted Chapel'. Dat make em mad thos, and dat why 'Big Baby' twist herself 'round so and say what she did.
"Zion Methodist asked Rev. Smith to come down here three weeks back and preach dey night sermon to dem. He come and fetched his wife and boy. All three of dem wuz dressed tip and he had a new car, Zion never helt de niggers that turned out to hear Rev. Smith. He 'lowed in his sermon dat de Lawd gwine to help dem lawyers push dat judgment through, and he wuz gwine to git his money. Ev'ybody grunted a low 'Amen' when he said dat. He is a fine preacher and his church up in Spartanburg is proud pf him.
"The 'Busted Chapel' members has give two hot suppers since Rev. Smith preached at Zion, Thin'n tonight is the second. They has good things to eat, and of couse, they makes money, as ev'ything fer the supper is give free.
"Robert Moment is de younges' deacon. He wuz workin' at Mr. Lewis Perrin's drug store and he got one the chain gang fer stealin' outen dat white man's drug store. Last week he come home from de gang and now he's gwine 'round wid a scription list tryin' to git money fer Rev. Smith's salary dat las year he preached.
"Janie is beatin' 'em all. She got a list, and she cook fer Miss Gaffney, So Miss Gaffney give her a dollar and a lot of rations fer dat fust supper. Janie went 'round to all dem rich white folks houses around Miss Gaffney's and Mr. Bolton's, gittin' money and dey give her a big 'scription. So maybe Rev. Smith won't git to put dem deacons in de 'Busted Chapel' in jail atter all. As fer me, I is gwine to de supper tonight, but ev'y day I sings praises, fer dats my life, Lawd!
"I aint never made no money 'cept when I cooked fer Mis' Bobo three years. She give me $2.50 a week. I got little things I needed wid it, and paid my 'surance (insurance). I nursed Miss Anne Bolton when she wuz a year old and her Pa give me a house and paid me $3. a week. Mis' Bolton give me all my clothes. Then I went to Miss Josephine Jennings' and lived in her back yard for fifteen years. Mango worked de garden and dey give us out victuals and $10 a month. All us got is 'surance. He got some and I got some.
"Once Miss Josephine took me to Toledo, Ohio, wid her. We stayed wid her friends dar a month. One day her friend got me to wash and iron fer her and she give me three dollars. I bought me a Sunday dress wid it. Dat night it wuz so hot Miss Josephine's chilluns could not sleep, so de lady took us on de trolley to a park fo' miles away. We stayed dar 'til atter midnight. Miss Josephine come home in two days. When Miss Josephine and her husband, Mr. Harry Jennings went to Georgia, Mr. Harry took the money me and 'Luck' had and bought us dis house. It cost $700 and Mr. Harry told us not to let nobody sign our names to no papers, kaise if we did dey would git our house. 'Luck' goes up to de courthouse and Mr. Bedenbaugh axes him a few questions and 'Luck' gives him money fer taxes. It is in my name, Emma Sanders, but 'Luck' got hisself our furniture and dat ole mule. He got our furniture and mule down fer $20. 'Luck' give his real name, Mango Sanders, Dey gives Mango receipts.
"I don't never git no money no mo'. Sanders works white folks' gardens and plows dey land wid dat ole mule. He fetches me a little money when he has any. I saves some in de box fer de 'surance man and dem taxes. Den us gives some to our church and it aint narry cent left.
"Chile, dar comes my little bantam hen wid seven baby bantams. Let me git her, I never meant fer her to git out'n dat dry place. I had her under de house. Lawd, have mercy Jesus, but I has a time. When dem bantams gits bigger I'll give you a pair." She sings, "Carry me to de Promis Land, Lawd, Carry me to de clouds whar de angels will grab me up". Then she claps her hands and exclaims, "Dats my life, Lawd, Singin' Praises".
TITLE: I WOULDN'T EXCHANGE.
Date of First Writing	January 31, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Bess Long Wilburn (White)
Address-Place	"Cross Keys, S. C."
Post Office Address	Union, S. C. R.F.D. 2
Occupation	Teacher
Name of Writer	Caldwell Sims
Name of Reviser	
Mrs. Wilburn wrote this article herself, at the request of the interviewer. She is considered by the rural Supervisor of Schools in Union County as one of the best, if not the best teacher in the County.
Mrs. Wilburn has the gift of expressing herself with a great deal of ease and fluency.
The interviewer explained the chief objective of a life history to the lady. She stated that her money which she has earned in the schoolroom has been invested in things that go to make a more attractive schoolroom and for the betterment of her home and community.
I WOULDN'T EXCHANGE.
Chapter 1 The Lady Enters.
At the quiet hour just before dawn more than half century ago in the little village of Jonesville, South Carolina, a group of people sat around a huge fireplace filled with brightly burning logs.
The only sounds in the room wuz the singing of the tea kettle as it boiled there on the hearth and the occasional splutter of the fire as the logs rolled together.
On the faces of the group was a look of expectancy and of waiting. A sound came from a figure lying on a big four poster bed in the corner of the shadow filled room.
The old negro mammy arose from her place by the fire and turned up the wick of the kerosene lamp.
One of the men, who was plainly the kindly country doctor, went to the bedside while the younger man cleared his throat nervously, threw another log on the fire and went into an adjoining room where three tousled headed little boys were fast asleep on a trundle bed.
In the dim light of the night lamp his eyes rested on the chubby faces of his three little sons and his lips moved in silent prayer for the beloved wife in the next room who was walking through the shadows that another life might be.
A tiny wail, hurried movements and the voice of the doctor saying, "Come, Gid, and see the girl who has broken up your term of boys."
As the father leaned down to kiss the dark haired mother she asked "Do you mind that she isn't a boy?"
The father looked at his wee daughter and with love filled voice replied, "I wouldn't exchange her for the world and that is how I, Mary Susan Elizabeth Gwynn Long, was born one January night to James Gideon Long and Susan Lourena Gwynn Long.
When I was only a few months old my father, who had been elected Sheriff of Union County, moved his family to the town of Union in 1885 - It was fitting that the people of his county honor him with the office as he had been tireless in his efforts to help his country in its hours of need.
His father, John D Long, a gifted and brilliant man, had been active in the building of the then younger county.
He had led two of his young sons to the battle fields of Va. and fought side by side with them.
Later in the same eonflict he saw another young son, Gideon, who was my father, go to war.
At that time Gideon was only fifteen years old but he marched away with Capt. D. A. Townsend and his company of "Sixteen Year old Boys".
After the War Between the States closed my father returned to Jonesville and opened a mercantile business. Soon after he married Lou Gwynn, daughter of Jeptha and Susan Abell Gwynn of York.
Their young married life was spent during the troublesome days of Reconstruction.
When human endurance had reached its limit my father was one of the very first to join that mysterious band of men known as The Clan, who went out to help make the South safe for its beloved women.
I have sat often at my father's knee and listened to the tales of the trying times.
My mother, too, had a helping hand to lend. She with other good and brave women endured the hardships, encouraged their men, and sat up nights making Robes for the "Riders by Night".
These two with their four children came to live in the Union County Jail. Here they encountered many trying times.
I remember the awful night when my mother awoke and heard horses hoofs beating the night air.
We heard them coming far off, then nearer, hundreds of them and then suddenly they had quite surrounded the jail. It was two o'clock in the morning, no one there to defend the prisoner but a lone man, his wife, an expectant mother, and four little children.
In those days there were no telephones in Union, so quite alone he stepped out on the porch and faced that mob of five hundred angry and determined men. He had only his gun so he spoke out to them, "I know many of you and know you as my friends but the first one of you to set foot across those stone steps I'll shoot down".
Away out in the crowd a man called out, "Come on back boys, lets go. Gid will do just what he says." So they went away and my father had saved a man from being lynched.
Later, when the negro was given a trial, he was proven inocent of the crime but he left here and went out West as there still was a feeling of prejudice against him.
Many years later my father was involved in a trouble not of his making he was sitting alone in his office. Unable to sleep he had gone to his office to <text not clear> to read.
It was half past two in the morning so was very much suprised when someone tapped gently on the office door. Thinking my mother had come for him he said "Come in". The door opened slowly and a negro stepped in.
My father recognized the man he had saved from the angry mob and said, "I told you to never come back, why have you?" The negro told my father that he lived in Texas, had worked hard and saved over three hundred dollars and hearing through some of his kin back here of the trouble <text not clear> father he had come back to offer all he had in gratitude to the man who had saved his life.
My father explained that <text not clear> was not a question of money, but something that has happened in the line of duty which he thought would come out all right.
He sent the negro with his gift back to Texas on an early morning train. None ever knew of this incident except my mother until the day my beloved father lay dying.
A letter then came which my mother opened. It was from the <text not clear> and he just wrote just to wish my father well as he had not been able to keep his mind off the great favor my father had done him. The <text not clear> line said: "May the best that can come to you, come" after reading that letter to my mother.
And the closing line said "May the best that can come to you, come'. I walked back and stood by my father's bedside. The setting sun sent its rays all around him and touched everything with its gold; as his life ebbed away I thought maybe the best that can come to man is when he has lived worthily and can go out to meet the great Adventure unafraid.
The morning after the mob had been dispersed my father was unable to find the jail keys. This was a serious state of affairs as they had to have food.
My mother, thinking my father might be overpowered by the mob, had hid them, but was unable to recall where, she had been so excited.
Two days later she suddenly remembered the hiding place. She had torn open one of the mattresses on the company bed and put them in it. Those keys were well hidden for there were two huge feather beds on top of the mattresses.
I have tried to blot from my memory the hangings that took place. As nearly as she could my mother field shield us from any knowledge of them, but we could see the hangman's rope being stretched out under the old wagon shed, the special meals of fried chicken and other good things my kind mother would have sent up to the condemed man.
Remember the visits of the kin folks, the preacher coming, and once my father having a pool built upstairs in the prison to baptize a man who was going to be hanged.
Many of my childhood memories are harrowing but I wouldn't exchange them.
Another girl had come to our house to stay. My sister, Sarah Louise Long there were main five of us. My brothers, James Gideon Long Jr. Abel Gwynn Long and John Arthur Long were old enough to go to school.
In those days the public schools were unsatisfactory so my brothers were sent to a private school known as The Male Academy. There was also a good private school for girls, Clifford Female Seminary.
When I was old enough to attend school I went to <text not clear>
<text not clear> Main street in Union was knee deep in mud. As I lived more than a mile from school I had to ride. I went in state, with an old fashioned phaeton, a gentle horse and an old negro driver at my disposal.
It mattered not to me that my driver was a United States prisoner serving a long prison term. In those days there were no chain gangs and often prisoners were sentenced to the county jail to work.
"Clifford Seminary" The name has a real charm for me. It was truly a place in which to live and love and learn. Not a school in terms of laborious lessons, tiresome tasks and long hard hours. It was a real school home to be happy in, learning about beautiful and I interesting things. Here I learned about art and music and books. Under the guidance of my beloved teachers, Dr. and Mrs. B. G. Clifford and Miss Susie Scofield, many happy days of my childhood were spent, studying in the class rooms, painting in the studio, reading in the library, helping Miss Susie tend the canary birds and squirrels or just playing under the rose arbor and in the beautiful flower gardens.
And now after nearly fifty years I am told that the same method of learning I knew then - is new!
Only this past summer I had the pleasure of observing in the schools of the Parker District in Greenville, S. C., where the learn by doing method is used, and as I watched the happy children living and loving and learning my eyes grew misty with my own childhood memories that I wouldn't exchange.
Then before I knew it, I was grown up! Graduation Day came. Flowers and friends and finery. Commencement was a gala affair.
There were plans and parties and dresses to be fitted. One for the baccalaureate sermon, one for the concert, one for the Reception and one for graduation, the<text not clear> had to be the loveliest of all with lacey ruffles and satiny streamers.
It was almost like getting your trousseau ready, and the dress makers in town were kept busy.
There were girl friends to he invited for commencement week. Your favorite aunt for whom you were named came, boy cousins to keep your girl friends entertained, and if you were fortunate enough to have a grandmother she came too. Such a good time everybody had flirting and frolicing.
The night of my graduation arrival. There were three of us who had started to school together and grown up together. Our dresses had yards and yards of misty white organdie, sewed all over with dainty lace and white satin ribbons.
I think Mamie's sash was wider than mine but my pompadour was higher than anybody else's.
It was the day of the pompadour and to be stylish one had to pile and pile your hair in a towering mass on copy of your head.
I remember what my favorite uncle said to me when he came up to congratulate me. "Bess, if you have half as much on the inside of your head as you have on the outsider, you'll surely make your mark in the world". I almost wished it had been my favorite aunt who had come, she wouldn't have said that.
After graduation there was a summer of fun. The only serious moment I remember was when we were by Mrs. Clifford to take the teachers examination being given that summer.
The three of us received first grade certificates. I did not know that mine would be put to use so soon.
About this time my father suffered financial losses. My sister younger than I needed to complete her education, so I asked my parents to let me teach. In those days that was the only work a young lady could do outside her home.
I want to be perfectly honest about entering the teaching profession. I cannot say that I was fired with the desire to help the young build character. Frankly, I didn't know what it was all about. I just wanted to help my beloved mother and father when they needed aid.
My sister younger than I need to complete her education, so I asked my parents to let me tech. In those days that was the only work a young lady could do outside her home.
The fulfils <text not clear> about ten or twelve almost grown girls and boys and about the same number of small children.
The first school offered me was not far from the home of a schoolmate of mine. Sacater in an isolated district, the <text not clear> was two and one half miles away had <text not clear> walk the distance alone as nearly all the patrons lived on the other side of the school.
The school house was a very old log house with cracks in it dat a rabbit could squeeze through. Sometimes when the door was shut a child's little dog would come whining through. There were two windows with wooden shutters and at one end a big fireplace made of mud and stones. We did not bother to cut wood; we just threw on a whole stick.
I didn't like that school. I had never seen a, and I was afraid of the big boys and girls. They knew so much more than I. They could work the most marvelous sums all over the front and back of their slates. I never liked arithmetic anyway.
But I loved those little children and we had good times together when we could slip off to one side of the school yard away from the big boys and girls.
There was something else I liked at Piney Grove. My walk to school went through a forest of magnificent pine trees. I would almost run to get to them. They stood tall and still. As I walked on the thick brown carpet of fallen needles, looked up through the columns with the rays of the morning sun slanting through them, and listened to the murmur of the wind in their branches, I felt as if I were in a great cathedral and my heart would sing a morning hymn. I believe I am a better woman for having known those trees.
Then I would pass on out of the woods with a song in my heart. I had a gun in my pocket which my father insisted I carry in case I met a mad dog. I was just about as much afraid of the pistol as I would have been of the dog.
I stayed two sessions. The salary was small, only twenty five dollars a month. Board cost twelve and one half dollars a month. The money that was lift <text not clear>. I don't know what I did for those children but I know what they did for me. There and then I resolved that if trying to be a good teacher and really being one could help people like those of Piney <text not clear> I would dedicate myself to the profession.
A friend who was teaching at Cross Keys gave up the position to move with her family to a distant state. Before leaving, she recommended me to the Trustees. The school was offered to me and I accepted. That was thirty - three years ago.
The road to Cross Keys was a long winding one and mad was up to the hub of the carriage wheels. The journey lasted from early morning until the sunset.
Awaiting me here was love and life and I wouldn't exchange.
One January morning long ago I stood on the knoll in front of the Key House and looked down the long drive way with its great gnarled walnut trees flanking each side. The whole world was aglisten with the morning sun dancing and shining on the frost that had fallen in the night.
I walked down the Walnut Lane past a friendly country store, followed a zizzag rail fence that seemed to be uncertain as to where it should end. I came to a little white school house that opened its arms and took me in. It has held me ever since.
The environment in my new school was better than in my former me. So was the salary, which was thirty - five dollars a month with <text not clear> ten dollars. She <text not clear>.
What <text not clear> for my board was out of keeping with the laden table I sat down to, a large old fashioned double deck affair. The part of the table that held the service was of course stationary while the part that held the food would spin around in a most convenient way for serving.
While the Cross Keys school has only one room it was the custom of those in charge to provide it with cultured and capable teachers. Here I found ambitious children whose parents encouraged them to prepare for high school in nearby towns. Nearly all the fulfil had older brothers and sisters away in college.
Many of the social activities centered around old Padgett's Creek Church that had been sheltering and tending the people for one hundred and fifty years.
Most of the families owned their own homes and lived well and comfortably, which made for a pleasant social atmosphere.
On Sunday afternoons the beaus of the place would take the young ladles to drive. That was before the day of the automobile so every young man tried to have a stylish turnout, high narrow buggy and fast stepping horse were the height of fashion.
Its quiet churchyard was the resting place of the forbears of these kindly people. Each Sunday they met to worship under the guidance of the old pastor who had led them for over forty years. After services there would be a period of visiting together there in the church and on the grounds friends and kinfolks asking about each other's health and exchange of <text not clear>. Then you were invited to go home with some one for dinner. It was very nice and friendly.
My first Sunday afternoon in Cross Keys was claimed by the young son in the home where I was boarding. As we drove over the pretty country roads and lanes the young man pointed out the Key House, his mother's old home, and asked me how I would like to live there. It was lovely. So I said, "why anyone would like that lovely old place". He <text not clear>, "I'm glad to hear that because I expect you'll live there". It struck me that young men in the country lost no I time but I accepted the remark as a joke. It turned out to be a prophesy forever for thirty - three years later I'm still here in the old Key House made dear to me with its own associations with other days and with my own memories.
Beside Sunday <text not clear> other social activities my first winter in Cross Keys were Tuesday night choir practice, Wednesday night prayer meeting, and the gay parties the young folks had on Saturday night. Sometimes the party would be a square dance, sometimes a pound party, or a candy pulling.
In summer we enjoyed picnics, strawrides, or water melon slicing. All of it was good wholesome fun.
The people of Cross Keys have always taken their politics seriously, so much ado is made over their campaign meetings and barbecues.
My first winter there passed pleasantly, I was busy and happy in my school duties and had been asked to accept the school again.
In the spring I was married to William Claude Wilburn, son of Barney and Mary Whitmire Wilburn.
The people whom I had come among and grown to love had In return loved me, so they seemed glad that "Miss Bess" was really one of them and would stay on with them.
We lived with my husband's parents. He was the overseer of his father's plantation which required a large force of negro hands. I stayed busy with my school duties. till in the spring of 1907 I went home to await the coming of our son.
Wm. Claude Wilburn, Jr., was born on Easter Sunday morning.
Later, we started housekeeping for <text not clear> at the old Gregory place. I loved it there; the wind swept hill, the friendly old house with its big open fireplaces, the old apple trees sifting their snowy petals down on the tender green grass, old "Aunt" Lissa at the wash place under the cedars, with her white clothes flapping on the line. Claude out in the freshly plowed fields and our little son playing under the big oak tree with his dog and white rabbits. The white pigeons flying around the cote with wings glistening in the sun like streaks of silver. I was happy on the hill baking and brewing and making a home.
When my son was four or five years of age I went back to the school room and he with me. From this point I really date my teaching career. Heretofore teaching was merely a mechanical process but now it was quite different. I not only taught with heart and mind but I put some of my soul in it.
Each day was a new day to do something fine in, something different in, something to make a child happy.
That was a long time ago. The little boy who trotted along by my side is a man grown, doing a man's work, but his mother still walks that road facing each day with high resolve to help some child find his place.
Two other little sets of fingers have held on to mine down that road, two little girls whose mothers God called home have shared my heart and home: I pray God that I have not been found wanting.
If I have some measure of success in my profession not all the credit is due me. I have tried to be the best teacher I could be, I've kept abreast of the times, I've read good books, I've traveled some, bought professional books and had professional training when I could get it. "The best gift is part of the giver." If that be true I have made my people here in Cross Keys a true gift, because part of myself is truly given to my work.
In return they have given me love and confidence and without either I could not have gone on and on with high courage and brave heart. They have made it easy for me.
Through the years I have shared with them, their joys and their sorrows. I have taught children of the children I taught. This year I am teaching the lovely little grandaughter of a former pupil, and when she slips her little arms around my neck to kiss me goodby I think how good God has been. Three generations kissing me goodbye in the same school room'. Yes, I have been a most fortunate woman.
Together we have had sorrowful days. When Sarah Ella Stevens tried to make her little death chilled fingers write her name as she lay gasping for breath. The day Ray Stevens who had gone so far (into that Happy Land) called back, "Miss Bess, I see Grandma. I'll tell her I made my grade". As the tired little heart stopped I looked down at the grief stricken father kneeling by his oldest son's death bed and thought of the mother lying so desperately ill back at home. I had been the father's teacher, the son's teacher who else could have share their grief so fittingly? Sometimes I'm called upon to share too their trouble of other kinds.
There was the time I went to the death house and saved poor under - privileged Roy from electrocution. The Governor listened to my plea and spared his life. Today Roy walks among his friends a free man.
The path we're trod together isn't always rough. It runs through pleasant places often. Sometimes it's a young friend who is going to be married and needs helpful advice or a young man who is going out to seek his fortune, a little old lady who needs a steady hand to guide her faltering steps, a young mother who wants a glad welcome for the new baby, or a little child that needs to be led. Or just a companion who needs a word of encouragement.
I have seen the Cross Keys school grow from a one teacher school to three. The salaries of the teachers increased from thirty - five to one hundred dollars. Thought out building had been enlarged it <text not clear> old and inadequate. I never allowed the condition of the building or the small salaries to effect my teaching or interest. I tried harder to make the place more attractive and comfortable.
Last year the Trustees, the Supt. Of Ed. And the government planned a new building for the Cross Keys school. I watched the tearing down of the old school house with mixed emotions. It held many memories for me; my people and had loved and learned and lived in it.
While the new building was under construction we went up on the wind-swept hill where I first kept house. I watched the children running in and out of my old home and my thoughts went back to the days when my little son played there with his dogs and white rabbits. Sometimes I'd see a flash of silver streak across the sky and I would think it was the flash of a pigeons wing, but the pigeons are long since gone and the streak of silver I saw was only the sunlight on the wings of an airplane high up over my old home.
We have moved into our new school house. It is a modem brick building, warm and comfortable, equipped with modern fixtures. In the basement there is a beautiful dining room where hot lunch is served each day. A school bus transports the pupils to and from school. I see happy children filling the halls and passing on into the airy school rooms where everything is done to make them happy and useful.
I see an efficient and helpful supervisor coming in to bring us new ideas and to encourage us. I see happy children with their teachers go down to dinner, then on out to a modern play ground, and I think, at last I have reached my goal.
But have I? I think not. Tomorrow when I walk out the door of the old Key House, still my well loved home, stand on the knoll and look up the road through the old Walnut Lane, there I'll see many changes. Only three or four of the old trees are left. They had to give way for the fine new highway. The old chestnut rail fence just wandered off long ago, the country store has had its face lifted and is trimmed all over with electric doo dads and is now a modern hussy with painted face.
The little white school house is gone and a <text not clear> new brick building stands with proud insolence just as if it had always been there, but I know better.
I remember the little white one that opened its arms to a young girl thirty - three years ago and took her to its heart. Tomorrow I shall walk up the road, open my arms to that new school house, so young and inexperienced, take it to my heart, and help make it the best place in the world in which to live and love and learn.
And I wouldn't exchange.