By D. W. Crawford
THE GREEKS IN CHARLOTTE
Kantantinos Kokens, trading as Gus McKene at 1417 West Trade Street, came to Charlotte in 1904, and several other Greeks preceded him. The first, who was married to an American wife, established a small fruit and confection store on West Trade Street in 1900, which he operated about a year. In 1901 two other Greeks opened a candy kitchen and store on Independence Square, but soon gave up the enterprise and went to South Africa. Some time in 1903 Henry Beavos and George Kerakos opened a wholesale and retail fruit business, which they operated as partners till 1906, when Beavos returned to Greece. Kerakos continued the business till 1919, when he also returned to Greece.
In 1907 two brothers, Jim and Gus Lambros, and two of their cousins, George and Charles Lambros, came from Roanoke, Va., and opened the New York Cafe on West Trade Street. This was the most modern and commodious place of its kind in Charlotte at that time. These four men stayed together for several years, and, by 1912, were operating thirty places of business in the two Carolinas. Some of these were cafes of the better type and some were small drink stands and billiard parlors. One of the partners returned to Greece in 1919 and died there the following year. The others are still in business in various sections of the South.
Prior to 1915 all of the Greeks who came to Charlotte were unmarried, but in that year three men and their families arrived, and other families have constantly been establishing residence here. According to the records in the naturalization office here, there has been an average of one family each year asking for citizenship papers for the past ten years. There has never been a movement of colonies to this section, seldom more than one family at a time.
All those who came during the first fifteen years of this century seem to have entered one of the three following occupations: fruit and confection stands, billiard parlors, and cafes. With the addition of dry cleaners, wine merchants, and traveling salesmen, these same occupations still claim about ninety per cent of the Greek population. From the time they first arrived in Charlotte all have prospered. They readily learned the American customs and language, and soon gained the respect and confidence of their business associates. Only a few who settled here during this period came to Charlotte directly from Greece, but selected this as their home after spending a short time in Norfolk, Savannah, Charleston and other seacoast towns; all are natives of Southern Greece.
All foreigh-born Greeks in Charlotte state that they came to America in the hope of improving their economic status. One of the older men, who did not at first settle here, stated that during the period from 1872, when the railroads began to penetrate the West, till 1890, Europe was flooded with advertisements about the opportunities offered in cheap land and ample employment in this country. This resulted in the migration of a great number of young men to America. As they became established and prosperous far beyond anything ever experienced in Greece, they induced relatives and friends to follow. There are two families here who came to America because of stories received by their parents from relatives who had settled in the West in the late seventies, after having worked several years in railroad construction. Many Greeks in Charlotte came to America because of the oppression of the Turks in 1912, and a more recent cause of migration was the political difference between King Constantine and Premier Venzelos, in 1919. The king was forced to abdicate and, as many of his followers lived in Southern Greece and were dissatisfied with the new government, all who could migrated to other countries. This fact no doubt accounts for so many southern Greeks in Charlotte.
According to the 1930 census, the Greek population in Charlotte was 310; of this number 142 were foreign-born. The present population is estimated at 400, with only a small increase in the number of foreign-born. Heads of families as well as single men have at all times been prosperous enough to maintain a high standard of living. Virtually all men with families own their homes, and there are none on relief rolls or working on WPA. In numbers the families are about the American average, the largest in Charlotte having eight children. The comparatively small number of immigrants coming here in recent years, in the opinion of some of the local Greeks, is due to the fact that Greece has been experiencing an era of unusual political and economic serenity. It is estimated that the Greek population in Charlotte, both native and foreign born, exceeds that of all other foreign nationalities combined.
There is no tendency toward living in colonies. Their homes compare favorably with those of the average middleclass American. Many of them use their native tongue in the home and in conversing with business associates of their nationality. Among the young people there is an increasing tendency to drop the native tongue altogether. This practice, however, is discouraged by the parents.
While parents see that their children attend their own parochial school two hours each day, they are equally as anxious for them to attend the public school, and enter whole-heartedly into school activities. They are ardent "fans", and even the mothers rarely miss a ball game. Their church school is conducted by the resident minister and the courses are Greek language, literature and history.
High school records in recent years show one graduate in 1935. In 1936 there were six boys and one girl; three of the boys entered college, but one dropped out after two years in order that his brother might attend. In 1937 one girl graduated with honors. She did not go to college, as Greek girls are not encouraged to follow a career. There were four in the class of 1938, all boys. Three of these are now in college. One is studying chemical engineering, one electrical engineering, and one printing and engraving. Four young men finished in the class of 1939 and all are planning to go to college. Two expect to enter military schools, one plans a literary career, and the other will study business administration. One member of this group was awarded the highest honor in a class of 496, besides receiving many other honors in scholarship and athletics. A Greek girl was selected Queen of the May Day Festival in the leading Junior High school. Twelve out of the eighteen Greek boys in high school are members of the school band which took first prize in the recent Southeastern Musical Festival.
In asking if the Greeks have a "Youth Problem", one gets only a shrug of the shoulders or a deprecating smile. However, Chris Papas answered the question as follows: "Yes, we have that problem, but I hardly think we have allowed it to become as serious as most American parents have done. We spend all the time we can with our children. We train them to respect our judgement, and insist upon them giving us their complete confidence in everything they are interested in. I have a boy seventeen, he is now a counselor at a boys' camp; a girl fifteen, and three other children. This is what I say to them: ' You are here in America- a great country. A country with a glorious past. A country in which there are all sorts of people- over one hundred millions. Some are good, some are bad- just as they are in France, England, Germany, Greece and all other countries. But you, with your own particular background of twenty-five centuries of culture and education, are obliged to take out of the American traditions, ideals and customs all that is good and worthwhile; combine them with your own, as they have been taught to you by your parents and teachers, and mold them into something that will mark you as an American citizen worthy of the trust, confidence and respect of all right-thinking people.' That is our attitude toward our youth. I love to think that we are presenting them with a beautiful boquet made of the choicest flowers of two great civilizations-ours the old, yours the new."
One youngster, the high school honor graduate mentioned above, stated that while he attended all the social activities of his class while in school, he had never asked for his father's automobile to "fill a date" with his girl. As a matter of fact, Greek parents discourage the practice of having a special girl friend. This young man stated that he had never had a regular "date" with a girl, and that he would never think of staying out on a "wild party" till the early morning hours as many of his American friends do. This boy's parent, however, stated that while the Greeks frown upon the privileges and freedom allowed American youngsters, there is an increasing tendency toward laxity in this particular. The Greek boys and girls mix freely with American youngsters and are on friendly terms with all their associates, but their more intimate friends are among their own people.
Mr. Athens, of the New York Cafe, stated that his observation is that the young Greeks in Charlotte are very circumspect in their conduct. He told of a case where a young man of good breeding had become involved in an "affair" with an American girl of doubtful character to the extent that he was threatened with a suit for breach of promise. While this young man was not completely ostracized by his Greek associates, there was a noticeable coolness toward him. This attitude resulted in a complete reformation of the young man.
The social and civic pride among the Greeks of Charlotte is considered exceptional. They have almost one hundred per cent co-operation in everything they undertake for the betterment of their people. They have the distinction of organizing the second chapter of the American Hellenic Progressive Association in the United States. Almost all of the local men are members. The order of the Maids of Athens has the largest membership of any city this size in the country; while the "Estia Girl's Club" has enrolled almost all the eligible young girls in the city. "The Sons of Pericles" is an order for young men. Members of this order are publishing a quarterly magazine in Charlotte, which is the only one of its kind in America. It is printed on high-grade book paper, is artistic in detail, and contains news and feature articles about the Greeks. It circulates extensively throughout the two Carolinas and is mailed to all parts of the United States and Canada. The publishers, who do the work during their spare time, do not receive any compensation. The publication is patronized by both Greek and American advertisers.
Another organization of importance is a chapter of the Adelphatis-Karyae. This is a national organization, composed of members from the city of Karyae in southern Greece. The local chapter has a membership of over three hundred, and ownslands and buildings near Gastonia, N. C., valued at more than $20,000.00. They hold an annual three-day meeting in July. During this session they present plays, pageants, musicals and other forms of entertainment for the members and their friends.
One of the Old World customs which is kept alive by the Charlotte Greeks is the observance of natal day anniversaries. Individuals do not celebrate the anniversary of their birth, but all persons who bear a certain name celebrate on the day which corresponds with their given name, according to the old Greek Calendar. For instance, the birth of any boy named "Stephen" is celebrated on September fourteenth, and all families where there is a "Stephen" unite in a round of social activities which lasts all through the day and sometimes till late at night. People of all ages attend these celebrations, and many of the church societies and social clubs take advantage of the occasion to hold their regular business sessions.
Another semi-social activity is the christening ceremony for infants. The ceremony proper is held at the church and lasts about an hour. After the formalities are dispensed with all relatives and intimate friends are invited to the home of the child's parents, where dancing, feasting, and other forms of entertainment are enjoyed for several hours.
March twenty-fifth is the only national holiday observed. This corresponds to our Independence day and marks the overthrow of the Turkish rule in 1821. Their celebrations are quiet. Part of the day is given over to public meetings at the church, picnics in the country, and meetings of various social clubs. Their games and forms of recreation are almost entirely American. The game of "amathaetis", which is similar to our game of "horseshoes", is the only native game played by the Greeks.
Most Charlotte Greeks belong to the Greek Orthodox Church. They have recently completed a church building at a cost of $25,000.00. They are distinctly a church-going people, whole families attending services in a body. The local minister, who also conducts the parochial school, is necessarily a man of great education. However, they are not always educated in American colleges, since all their services are conducted in the Greek language and their teaching is also of the Greek, it is not necessary that they have an English education. In discussing the religious life of the Greeks here, one resident stated that he was of the opinion that Greek children easily grasped the principles of the Christian religion by reason of the fact that it is all expounded to them in the original Greek language, which they are taught from infancy. This informant stated that any Charlotte Greek could easily converse with St. Paul if he should return to earth. They assume a great degree of pride in the fact that theirs was the first nation to accept and promulgate the Christian Religion.
All of the Greeks interviewed in this survey state that their main interests are the same as any loyal American. They take no part in politics, voting independently.
They have no political aspirations and no "pet" notions of government which they wish to promote. They are in a sense clannish, but they have no clashes with, nor any particular dislike for other nationalities. However, in recent years they have resented the attitude of Germany toward the Jews and the Czechs. They are bitterly opposed to Communism.
A noteable characteristic of the local Greeks is that they place a premium on hard work. The young men are taught to engage in some honorable occupation, and they do not object to drudgery. They are all conspicuously law-abiding. The name of a Greek seldom appears on the criminal court records. There have been cases where a criminal has allowed himself to be referred to as a Greek, when he was of some other nationality.
July 26,1939
Mrs. Thomas Kalavaris, (Greek Mother)
1430 Park Drive.,
Charlotte, N.C.
Dudley W. Crawford, Writer.
( No names changed)
DISCOVERING AMERICA IN A HOSPITAL
"A story of my life would necessarily include my childhood in Greece, but that period seems so long ago and so remote and different from what my life has been in Charlotte, I can hardly recall it. It seems like a dream, although I am still a young woman. The same may be said about my first impressions of this country. Of course, I am able to recall some of the sensations I experienced as we came into New York, the sight of the Statue of Liberty, the sky-line of the city in the early morning, and the more detailed observations I made in that city and in Washington during the next few weeks; but I really discovered America in the Mecklenburg Tuberculosis Sanitorium here in Charlotte "
In this manner Mrs. Thomas Kalavaris, of 1430 Park Drive, Charlotte, N.C., began to relate her reactions as a Greek immigrant in America. She is dark, tall and graceful with sparkling brown eyes and a personality that would be conspicuous in any group of women. Her charming smile and genuine interest in her guest makes her an ideal hostess.
"I was born in the small town of Karpension in Peloponesus, Greece, in a family of four children. I can recall nothing of interest before 1928, when I met my husband, who had returned to Greece after being in America fourteen years.
As a girl of seven, I remembered him as he was before he went away; but our meeting upon his return was really a case of "love at first sight". After falling in love with each other, it was necessay for him to remain longer than he had planned, as our families insisted on going through with the Formalities of our country, in regard to engagements and marriage. We remained in Greece a short time, enjoyed a wonderful honeymoon and then sailed for America.
"We arrived in Charlotte, where my husband had a small business, in the fall of 1928. Soon after our arrival a little girl was born, and another a year later. For this reason I was unable to make much progress toward getting acquainted with the American customs and language. Soon after the birth of the second girl I was stricken with tuberculosis and immediately entered the Mecklenburg Sanitorium. In a way this was tragic, but in one sense, it was a great blessing.
"Prior to the time I entered that nstitution I knew only a few Greek women and no Americans. I could speak no English at all. I felt lonely and out of place, but after a few days in the hospital it seemed that every one around the place began trying to see how much they could do to make me happy. The doctors, nurses, patients and even the porters flocked to my room. I thought at first it was through curiosity, but soon learned they were all interested in my welfare. When they understood I was anxious to make friends and to learn their language they seemed to vie with each other in their efforts to help. They were so anxious to help and so persistent in their efforts that the doctors had to restrict my visiting hours.
"Please remember, I had been away from friends and relatives for two years, had been burdened with two babies, and now in bed with what we considered an incurable disease. I had every reason in the world to become lonesome and homesick. While I faced it bravely as I could, and made up my mind not to let it "get me down"; I don't believe I would have been able to live through it if the doctors, nurses and patients had not been so kind and attentive. They all went out of their way to be nice to me. Even today, the head nurse, Miss Warnock, is more dear to me than a mother or sister could possibly be.
"One of "the greatest trials' in entering the hospital was giving up my babies. The Greek mother is, perhaps, more sensitive in this particular than any other mother in the world; but I soon learned they were being treated like little princesses at the Junior League Baby Home, and every' one made it a point to assure me of this fact. After a short time I became so absorbed in learning the language, and so interested in my new friends that much of the pain of separation was alleviated.
"After two years I was permitted to return to my home, but after six months it was necessary for me to enter the hospital again. Except for short visits with my family I stayed there six years longer. During these six years I devoted much of my time to study, and now I feel that I have really mastered the English language.
"During all this time I came in contact almost solely with. American people, and I learned to love them. I learned to admire their courage and determination as I saw them in the hospital trying to get well. This disease is not common in our country. Of course, it is a tragedy that one has to lie in a hospital bed year after year and be denied the ordinary pleasures of home life; but to me it has been a beautiful revelation of the kindness and generosity of the American people toward those who are unfortunate. I cannot say I am glad I was sick, but those years of confinement will always be a bright spot in my memeory, because of the lasting friendships I made. I cannot express too strongly my appreciation.
"Fortunately, my husband's business has been such that we can afford a servant since I came home. I am able to devote most of my time to my children; they are now eleven and. twelve years old. They finished grammar school here and then entered Belmont Abbey. At present they are spending eight weeks at Camp Latta. No, I don't particular want them to take up a career, but I shall see that they are prepared in case it is ever necessary for them to make their own way. I have talked with them about this and find that one would like to teach and the other thinks she would like a business career. I want my girls to conform to American customs. I have a great admiration for American girl, their independence and self-reliance, but I feel that they do not appreciate what a wonderful country they are living in. I think it is wonderful that a girl is permitted to enter almost any profession or occupation she desires.
"I was made very happy this week when I learned the campers selected one of my girls as the most "likeable" girl at the camp. This is another evidence of the generosity and tolerance of the American people.
"Yes, I agree that some girls have too much freedom; many of them perhaps go wrong by reason of this fact, but I feel that a great majority of them are able to take care of them selves and the future womanhood of America will be just as pure and good as that of any other country. I have an acquaintance with most of the Greek women in Charlotte, but I feel just as near and just as intimate with the American women as those of my own race I seldom go out and have to depend on my friends coming to see me, and I can say that they are very considerate.
"No, I don't think I will ever go back to Greece. Of, course, I would like to see my mother, brothers and sisters; but I hardly think I would risk a trip, especially at this time when there is so much talk of war Greece seems a long, long way off. You see I have to guard my health. My husband, my children and my dearest friends are here. I am thoroughly sold on America."
July 14, 1939
Anthony English
104 East 4th Street
Charlotte, N.C.
Waiter
D. W. Crawford, writer
I AM A RADICAL
No names changed
"From the viewpoint of the average Greek, I suppose I am a radical. I don't conform to, and I cannot tolerate, some of their attitudes and customs," said Anthony English, rising sophomore in the engineering school at the University of Louisiana.
"Tony", as he is known by hundreds who frequent the Sanitary Grill on East 4th Street where he is head waiter on one shift, has been working during vacations and at odd times since 1930, when financial reverses almost wiped out his father's business. He is twenty years old, more than six feet tall and weighs about 215 pounds. He is not fat. He played scrub football at L. S. U. last year and expects to make the varsity team this year.
"Yes, you can put me down as saying (and I don't care how strong you make it) that I have no patience with the manner in which Greek parents in Charlotte restrain their children. Before I even finished grammar school I decided that if a Greek boy expected to get the most out of life here in America, he would have to make, and take advantage of, all the social and business contacts which the high type American uses as an aid to success. I was the first Greek boy in Charlotte to associate freely with the American students in all their social activities. As a result I had a part in all the extra-curricula activities. I was a member of all the important committees and was an officer in all the organizations at one time and another during my high school years. All those contacts helped me and were benefits that wouldn't have come my way if I hadn't ignored the hard restrictions put by most Greek parents on their boys.
"As an example of how absurd some of their attitudes are I'll give you an incident that happened during my senior year in high school. On one of my afternoons off—I didn't get many—I met up with two girls out strolling around, window shopping, and so on. As they were members of my class, from two of the finest families in town, and good friends of mine, I asked them to go with me to the theatre. On the way we met two Greek women who were so dumbfounded at the sight of a respectable Greek boy escorting two American girls that they felt it their duty to tell my people.
"My mother is rather broadminded about such things and never mentioned it, but Dad, oh my! Did he cuss me out? I'll say he did. I quietly informed him that while I had always loved and respected him, I couldn't continue to unless he also treated me with respect and consideration and allowed me some of the minor privileges I considered important. "At that time and for several years before I had been making my own money and was saving it up for college expenses had never called on him for "spending money", and I felt that I was justified in my attitude, and still feel that way. I figured that what little I spent in keeping up little social contacts with the better people was a good investment. Fortunately, Dad understood my viewpoint; at least he has never discussed it with me since. This determination of mine to disregard the usual Greek customs has benefitted me in many ways, both in high school here, in holding jobs, and in my college life last year.
"I think I was just as popular as any freshman on the campus last year. I got a bid from one of the leading fraternities, and had I into the best homes and most exclusive social circles of the city. I gained a wide acquaintance among both men and women; acquaintance which not only made it pleasant for me, but will doubtless be of help to me in many ways in the future. If there is anything wrong in my attitude or conduct I am certainly unable to see it. Of course I have a high regard for the superiority of the Greek race of the past. Its history and traditions are such that any Greek may well be proud of; but I expect to live in America, and my success as an electrical engineer will not depend much upon my observance of out-moded customs of a distinguished race. When I have finished my training I will be dependent upon the general public for business.
Even if I had all the Greeks in the South as clients I would probably starve.
"While I expect to keep in close contact with American men and women in all walks of life, and want to observe and absorb everything worthwhile in their habits and customs, I do not mean to imply that I approve of the utter lack of restraint in many American homes. And, in so far as the customary restraint as practiced by Greek parents keep their children from stepping across the border line of common decency and morality, I'm for it. But those parents often go to an extreme that I do not think is fair to the youngster who will eventually have his own life to live and cannot always have the help and advice of his parents. In some cases boys have to lie to their parents in order to keep up what they rightfully consider their social standing with their American friends and associates. I have never lied to my parents. I preferred to scrap it out in the open. I. suppose I had just a little more nerve than the average Greek boy.
"Certainly I do not approve of the conduct of the average American youngster; the promiscous necking and petting, late hours and drinking, and their tendency to try to crowd too much action into a few hours. However, there are lots of young Americans whose minds are just as serious and whose conduct is just as circumspect as the model Greek youngster, and I see no reason why I cannot mingle with that class of people without injury to myself or disgrace to the time-honored Greek customs. At any rate, I'm willing to risk it, and I don't think anything is going to stop me.
"Yes, I utilize all my spare time, have been doing so since I was a kid. While in grammar school I worked before and after school hours as newsboy, delivery boy, clerk, etc. Later I worked as switchboard operator and reception clerk at the radio station. Sometimes I would pinch-hit for the announcer. I prepared the news items for the commentator as they came over the teletype, and acted as announcer at the dances and musical programs. I am getting all the experience I can around the radio stations, as I expect to specialize in that field of electrical engineering. When I finish at L. S. U. I expect to go a year or two to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Yes, I feel sure I will be able to complete my education, as I make fairly good money during vacation. I made a nice little sum last year coaching several young men in Greek."
July 14, 1939
L. Kastakapaulos
309 West Trade Street
Charlotte, N.C.
Manager Lunch Room and Billiard Parlor
D. W. Crawford, writer
LOUI
No names changed
L. Kastakapaulos, known to his public at the Elite Billiard Parlor as "Loui", looks out on the world with a perpetual smile, while he serves wine, beer, hamburgers and light lunches. He is short and dark; his pointed chin inclines determinedly upward but the grimness of his wide mouth is relieved by a neat little mustache, very black. Loui reserves his conversation for business purposes, but his smile, distinctly a business asset, is free. He dispenses a glass of water to the ragged newsboy and dirty-faced children on the loose in the same manner he would serve his best lunch or wrap a dollar bottle of wine.
"I was born", he said," in the little town of Bramage, Greece, in 1896. My father was a farmer. He raised cotton, corn, and small grain. We also raised some cattle that gave us a nice income. The land there is along a good-sized stream and is very rich. I started to the public schools when I was six years old but quit when I was thirteen and went to work with my father on the farm; that was all the schooling I ever got. No, I didn't especially like farm work. I tried to run away and join the army during the Balkan War in 1912, but I was too young and the officers carried me back home at once.
"As there were six children in the family and all pretty well grown up, and the farm was small, there was no objection from the family when I decided to come to America in June, 1914-. We had some friends in the State of Washington and when I landed in this country I decided to go there. It took most of my money to pay for the ocean passage and the rest was spent by the time I got to Kansas. I struck that place during the wheat harvest. I heard they wanted men in the wheat fields and since I was brought up on the farm I decided that would suit me fine. But I was very much mistaken. I had never shocked wheat like they did there and it took me some time to learn the trick. It was such hard work I made up my mind to leave that night---but I had no money. And I badly needed the good food they served. I guess I would have gone anyway if I hadn't been so tired, I went to sleep as soon as I lay down and didn't wake up till the bell rang at daylight. It was too late then to run away so I went back to the field. It was hard work and so hot some of the college boys had to drop out One fellow died from sunstroke.
"I made twenty dollars there in ten days--that seemed like a lot of money to me--and joined a bunch of men who were following the harvest season into the Dakotas. We worked for about another month. I then had money enough to go on to Washington. My Greek friends were working at a lumber camp, and I got a job at once helping saw down trees. That work was really hard, especially for one who had never tried it before, Some of the trees were six feet through. I went from one job to another--boss cutter, head logger, and finally got to be a sawyer. A man was not supposed to live long in those days as a sawyer. He was strapped on the log carriage, driven by a steam piston. When the saw outs through the log, the carriage is jerked back at a terrific speed. The sawyer has to move the log the exact space of another board as it moves backward. If his nerves don't soon break down he is likely to be killed by a broken saw. The saw is seventy feet long and runs over two large pulleys at a terrible speed, just like a belt., They break sometimes and often wrap around'a man and tear him-to pieces. I understand they have eliminated all that danger now by having the saw guarded and an enclosure for the sawyer.
"While I was working in the lumber camp I took out naturalization papers, and when the United States entered the World War I figured I would join the army. But the government had to have lumber and we were notified that we were already in the service. So my, ambition to be a soldier was blasted again. We were paid good wages during the war but living expenses were high and we didn't save much. In 1919 I heard from a friend in Charlotte who wanted me to come here, so I did.
"I have been here since 1919, and have learned all I know about this business since that time, I went back to Greece three years ago and married a girl I knew before I left there. Her people and mine had it all planned years ago. Yes, it suited me all right--suits her too, I think. She likes; it very well here but it is hard for her to learn the language. She is learning fast now since she has been attending the WPA Adult Education classes. She goes three times a week. She gets lonesome, of course, but she will soon get over that when she learns more of the language and customs. The neighbors, both Greek and Americans, have been mighty nice to her. No, we have no children. She belongs to one of the clubs for Greek women; we both go to church and the movies, and attend all the name-day celebrations and other social functions of the Greeks, We're happy, all right.
"This business here? Oh, it's pretty good most of the time I make a fair living. It's not so good in the summertime, too many people go away, or sit in the shade. In the wintertime they want a warm place to hangout. Most of our business comes from the middle of the afternoon till midnight. Yes, we' have all sorts of people in here; the good and the bad; mostly good. We don't allow any rowdy conduct. In fact we seldom have to call anybody down. It all depends how you handle people--you give them a rod, they take a mile.
I generally call a man down before he gets too noisy, and the next time he know about how far he can go. They all soon learn that we don't permit any funny business in here. Oh yes, some Greek places close for our National Holiday, March 25th, but we don't. Sometimes part of the force goes on a picnic or to a meeting, but not always. We are Americans. When the Americans close, we close.
"I don't know when I'll go back to Greece, maybe never. I would like to go there for a vacation if I had the money. Every Greek wants to spend a vacation in Athens. There everyone has a good time. No, I don't think I would send my wife back alone; don't think she would go that way. Yes, some of the old-timers would like to go back there to die, but not me. This is my country now; it has given me a good living, and a much better one than I would have made in Greece, so I want to die and be buried here. But, let's not talk about that. Have a glass of wine." And Loui drank to the future of America.
July 13, 1939
Mike Kofinas
189 West Trade Street
Charlotte, N. C.
Salesman
D. W. Crawford, writer
Mary R. Northrop, reviser
IT COME OUT O. K
No Names changed
"No, this is not my place, I sell fruit for my brother. I sell here since Armistice Day. When was it, 1919, maybe? Yes, I come from Greek islands. Southern coast."
Mike is short and stubby. His teeth are as blue-white as his close-cropped hair and the shaggy brows that lie around his deep blue eyes like fuzzy white caterpillars.
Mike is strictly business while on duty and gives perfect service. He talks freely in Greek with his countrymen but seldom makes acquaintances among Americans. His English accent is inimitably bad, too bad to reproduce. His gift of pantomime perhaps has made it unnecessary for him to learn the language.
"I first remember playing in water," he said," on the shore of an island on coast of Southern Greece. We lived on many islands. My father was a man of the sea. Children lived in the water--sailing toy boats, swimming, fishing, playing in the sand. I can't tell when I went to work. Worked on my father's boats. He do all kinds of shipping, hauling goods from other islands, the mainland, and maybe from distant ports, I don't know. He drowned at sea when I was young.
"I was a sailor and worked for shippers, I was stout and always had good job. Before I was full grown I was captain small sailing ship. Owner was sponge fishing. We went on long trips about the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, any place we could find sponge. Boats sometimes got wrecked in storm, sailors most always got ashore, but had to help build another vessel. Sailor had to be workman, same as seaman.
"I come to Charlotte on account I had relatives here. I got here in 1904. Stayed ten days. Nothing doing. Went to Kansas City, got a job building railroads. It was road from there to Cripple Greek, Colorado. Big mining. Later went on to Denver. I worked at laying ties and rails. Hard work, good pay. While I was working on railroad I told only lie I ever told.
"I'd been there few weeks when boss had row with foreman--told him he didn't know nothing. Fired him. Asked me if I ever been foreman. I say yes. I hadn't, but I knew anybody who could lay keel and rib and rig boat like I had, could lay railroad. We worked all kinds on that railroad--Irishmen, Poles, Italians, Swedes, and Greeks. All tough, worked hard, drunk lot of liquor. Had a little trouble--fist fights. Not amount to much. Irishmen and Greeks best workers. Both drunk lot of whiskey. Greeks never got drunk but Irishmen always got drunk. Fought on pay-day. Work, yes. Worked hard.
Sometimes twelve, fifteen hours a day. Sometimes when washouts come, work all night. Worked for that road four years and then went with the Salt Lake and Rio Grande. Worked there ten more years. Got telegram from brother here to come. He had work for me. Been here ever since.
"I have three brothers in this country. One owns this business, one is a painter in Pittsburgh, one is shipping clerk at the Southern Fruit Company here in Charlotte. Got niece working in the dime store here. Red Cross send her here from Greece when she is thirteen years old. I take her in the fruitstand when the sales tax first come, she gets good experience counting up pennies. See? I show her all time, and when new dime store opens, she gets job first day. Twenty-three work there first. Pretty soon some go. Then some more go. My niece stay on. She make them fine clerk.
"Yes, I'm married, got two kids; the wife and kids, they never come here. I go back to Greece once in while--five or six times, maybe. I go again next spring. I am sixty-four years old. Maybe I die there, who knows? One time on the boat I have appendencities. They don't operate. Wait till we get to port of Athens. I come out all right. One time here I was operated for kidneys. It come out O.K., too. I have pneumonia, in Mercy Hospital seven weeks. Six doctors say I die; one say no. The one is right. I still here.
"No the wife don' t like this country. She never come here, she don' t know; but she say she don't. I no argue with women. I fuss with men on railroad, but not with women. I'm all right."
July 26th 1939
Gus McKene ( Kantontinos Kokens )
1417 West Trade St.,
Charlotte, N.C.
Cafe Owner
Dudley W Crawford, Writer
Original Names Not Changed
"GUS"
Gus MoKone, whose real name is Kantantinos Kokens runs a combination café, delicatessen, and smoke shop on the outskirts of the business section of Charlotte, Ha has no "hired help ", but sometimes accepts the services of his American wife during the rush hours, which are from eleven to one o'clock when the employees of the near by bakery and laundry are out for lunch. He enjoys the friendship of all his regular customers, but does not especially care for strangers or those who drop in occasionally. While ha apparently resents the continuous stream of youngsters from the public playground near his place asking for a drink of water or a "sucker": he really loves then all and would be lonesome without them a fact the children all understand, and they take his "balling outs" with a wink for their pals and a smile for Gus.
He is a Greek of the "old school", and has no patience with the trend of American civilization and especially as it pertains to the youth of this country. Having served as a soldier in the Greek army during the Balkan War, and never tiring in his recital of the military exploite of both ancient and modern Greeks, he believes that the United States should have a system of compulsory military training. Strict discipline in the home, law observance in public, and respect for the rights and wishes of their elders, in his estimation, constitutes the only' salvation of American youth. Upon this philosophy he has reared his four children, all of whom have won for themselves places of prominence in the business and social life of the community.
He grows eloquent in his recital of the causes which wrecked his country's civilization in ancient times and draws a striking analogy between practices in those days and the present time here in America. The freedom and independence of the American youth, and their resentment against the ordinary parental restraint are heading this nation for the "rooks", according to Gus, From his experience he relates the following story which he thinks proves the importance of properly handling youthful delinquency:
I suppose I was about twelve years old. One day my father sent me to town with a lamb to sell. I had to cross a county line where we had to pay a small tax, or take a ticket which was to be paid after the commodity was sold. I decided to act smart and left the highway at the line and dodged the tak man. While I was selling the lamb at the market an officer up and asked if I had a ticket from the tax collector. I told him I came in before he had taken up his post and it was too cold for me to wait until he came on duty. "All right", "I will take your coat till you sell the lamb and pay the tax." It was terribly cold and I didn't want to give up my coat, but there was nothing else to do. I went from one market place to another trying to sell that lamb, it was poor and hard to sell I got so cold I was miserable before I finally made a deal. When the dealer asked for my tax receipt I was unable to produce it, so he called a policeman and had me taken to jail.
"Well, there I was in Jail, shivering in the cold without my coat. In the afternoon I was hailed into court and received a sentence of ten days in the work house. In the meantime my parents had come to investigate, learned the circumstances and went book home without making any attempt to have me released-they knew it was no use it was not a reglar prison where all sorts of criminals were together, but a place of setsntion I was given light tasks all by myself; none of the others knew who I was or what I had done; I was tronted kindly and made comfortable I stand that allright, but the thought of facing my parents ande so miserable. When I returned home-and was I glad-I was welcomed as if I had returned the sane day I left No mention was ever made of my crime, and I received in my mind to avoid such a thing in the future. Can you Imagine anything like that happening here is America? My father was reasonably prominent; We were considered one or the best families in the valley where we lived, but that didn't get me anything when I broke the law.
"I may be wrong, but I feel like American parents will have to adopt some method of control over their children. Now look at that bunch back there around, that counter I happen to know they live more than a mile from here-they got no business here-, and If I don't watch thm they will slip something in their pocket If they did I wouldn't have them arrested because their parents would stand up for them and maybe say that I was mistaken.
If they were taken to court the Judge would probably release then with a lecture. I am not boasting, but Greece in practically free from serious crimes, and it is because they have always strictly enforced the laws."
Although not an educated man, Gus is well-informed about the history of his country; is familiar with Greek mythology and ancient literature Its gets enthused in his description of the natural beauty of his country According to his, its fields are the richestx in the world, its skies the brightest and its sunshine is the most soothing and gentle. He quotes Byron's tribute to Greece, and for obvious reasons considers him the greatest of all the Englis poets.
"Yes, I am going back to Greece I want to spend a vacation in Athens. You can't imagine what a grand time one can have there. Everyone is happy and gay, and who wouldn't be there? It is truly God's country."
"No, I'm not condencing America, it is only that I interested in herm future. I am merely speaking as an American citizen. This is also 'God's Country', but it is so new and has grown so fast I am afraid we are not placing the main emphasis where it belongs. We have so many things to do, so many places to go, so much leisure time to devote to recreation, and so much freedom, we forget the importance of quiet hours devoted to meditation, study end relaxation. I feel that we ought to slow down. However, I love America and am thankful for the opportunities she has afforded me and my children-America first and then Greece.
August 7, 1939
Mrs. Chris Pappas ( Greek Mother )
101 East 4th St.
Charlotte, N. C.
Dudley W. Crawford, Writer
No Names Changed
"MY GREEK HUSBAND"
Mrs. Chris Pappas, whose husband owns the Sanitary Grill at 101 East Fourth Street, Charlotte, N.C., was formerly Miss Gussie Williams. She is a graduate of Queens-Chicora College, Charlotte, and the Richmond School of nursing, Richmond, Virginia. She gave up the practice of her profession after two years for the love of a Greek soldier in the American Army. Her story is told in the following words:
"I was reared on a large farm near Charlotte, finished high school in the country and entered college here at the age of eighteen. I received a Bachelor of Science degree and immediately entered a school of nursing; finishing the course in the summer of 1918.
"I returned to Charlotte for the practice of my profession and believe I would have made a successful nurse if I had not met Chris? pappas. He was stationed at the army camp near the city and happened to drop in at the boarding house where I lived. From the minute I was introduced to him, I knew I would never want to nurse any more, unless it was Chris or his children. However, at intervals, after he was ordered over seas, I had romantic dream of going with the army to France, finding Chris sick or wounded on the battlefield, and all that sort of "stuff ", but I was too practical to even try to get in the army.
"Soon after he went to France the terrible Influnza epidemic broke out; every available nurse and doctor proved in-adequate to cope with the situation, and love dreams were forced into the background. But for the long hours on duty I would have suffered many heartaches during the time my lover was at the front. Things soon got back to normal, the war was over, but I continued to suffer because "my man" had to remain for some time with the army of occupation.
"Finally the happy day of his return: I journeyed to Hoboken to meet him, and when I saw him walk down the gangplank I was positive he was the handsomest man in the whole United States Army. We were married immediatley and returned to Charlotte, Instead of a wedding trip we spent the first week of our married life opening a restaurant, and I am sure no girl ever had a more glorious honeymoon than I did those first few weeks in that little cafe on Tryon street.
"No, I do not think my husband is so very exceptional; but the characteristic of the Greek to pay homage to his wife, his tendency to place her on a pedestal; giving her his complete Confidence and love, somehow fitted into my old-fashioned Southern ideas, which I doubtless formed by reading a Certain type of Southern love stories during my girlhood.
"Yes, you might say that my husband is above the average among the Greek immigrants in this section in that he has a fine family background, is well educated in both Greek and American schools and is broadminded about almost everything But my observation of the Greeks as a people leads me to believe that the matter of filial devotion is one of their most outstanding traits Owing to his excellent education, his wide experience with many types of people, both in America and other countries, he is more generous and tolerant than the average Greek There must have been times when he had ample reasons to be provoked at some of my American peculiarities; but owing to his extreme kindness and generosity, I have never detected the slightest irritation He has often called my attention to them, but never at a time or place where it would be embarassing to me You have perhaps noticed that he has a wonderful command of the English language, and he often lauge at some of my Clumsy expressions.
"While I did not deon it necessary to do so, I spent eighteon months in Greece in order to learn more about the Greek people. My husband' s relatives and all the. prominent people of the city seemed to vis with each other in an effort to entertain me At times I felt as If I was some visiting celebrity. Owing to the fact that I spoke very little Greek, so much attention was at times embarrassing. However, the Greeks have a keen sense of humor and they derived a lot of pleasure from my clunsy conversations.
"I placed my children, age ten and five, in the Greek public school, and they became very efficient in the language during our visit in fact, the younger one almost forgot her English. That visit enabled me to more fully understand and appreciate the Greek race I was in the homes of all classes and found that most of their outstanding traits are commendeble. Among their most noticable traits, even among the wealthy, is their desire to do something useful I visited in the home of one wealthy family where three of the girls were dentists and two of the boys were physioinna. In the homes of the less well-to-do I found the girls engaged in all sorts of handicraft They make the moot gorgeous rugs, draperies and carpets; delicate laces and embroideries, and do exquisite china-painting, Many of these articles are offered for sale at the regular Monday morning bazaar, held in the public square.
"As for the Greeks here in Charlotte I find there are two KJtaat SHX types. Most of the older people try to retain all the customs and practices of the old country, especially in the matter of restraints thrown about their children. The younger people feet under these restraints, and some of the boys refuse to submit to them. This intolerance among the older people is, of course, due to ignorance and lack of the proper outlook upon the future, just as it is throughout the world. My husband and I both agree that since we are first of all Americans, we must necessarily conform to American customs.
"While many Greek boys ignore their parent's wishes in certain matters, all of the girls seem to remain strictly Greek. There is no record here of a Greek girl marrying an American, but several Greeks have married American girls. The American youngsters try to be friendly and cordial toward the Greek boys and girls, but find them so hesitant and reluctant • about accepting advances, they soon give up the effort and put them down as clannish, selfish or " peculiar." This is particularily true of the girls. They are clearly more susceptable to their mother's influence than are the boys. From my observation, I would state that most of the boys from the well-to- do Greek families are thoroughly " Americanized."
"There is what you might call a " minor " trait of the Greeks, and one that you have perhas noticed, since my husband has refused to give you his life history. That is, they have a sort of Inferiority complex. They are overly sensitive, too modest, and often ill at ease among the Upper class Americans, They shy away from any sort of ballaboo or publicity. Knowing my husband as you do, you will agree that he would be a welcome member of any civic or social club; yet he does not belong to any except the Greek socities. The local newspaper is planning to devote a special section of a Sunday issue of their paper to the Greeks, and have asked him to let them carry his picture and a short story about his business, but he refuses to consider it. Personally, I consider such matter perfectly legitimate publicity. It is certainly something the average American would be glad to get, even though it in not deserved.
"Yes, my children are growing up as Americans. My oldest is a boy of seventeen lie won several honors while in high school and for the past two summers has been a counsellor at a boy's camp My second child is a girl of twelve, and the baby is alos a girl of ten years old, No, the rearing og the children is not left entirely to me; we go along together in this particular just as we do in business We have taught them to love and honor their Greek ancestory, but at the same time teach them that their first allegiance is to America"
September 15, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
HOLT TRINITY
( Greek Orthodox Church, Charlotte, N.C.)
rented a hall on E. Trade St. After a few months at this location they moved to a hall on W. Trade St., where they remained for sometime, finally returning to the Chamber of Commerce.
Although services had been held regularly for three years it was not until 1922 that the church was completely organized with a membership of 35
In 1927, with the congregation steadily increasing and the need of a Church building of their own becoming a real necessity, a Church property at 1427 So. Boulevard was purchased from the Westminster Presbyterian Church at a cost of $32,500.
Since then, in consequence of additions and improvements, the value of the property has increased to $50,000, and now has an indebtedness of only $4000. The congregation plans to build in the near future an addition for the Sunday School.
A mixed choir of 20 voices furnish music for the services on Sunday.
The first resident Priest was Rev. Polycarpos Krithinakis who served the congregation for three years. The present Priest in charge is Rev. Chrysostomos Papalambrou who came to Charlotte recently from New York City where he had served for 16 years.
The Church contributes to the support of the Greek Theological Seminary located at Pomphret, Conn., where after completing 4 years of study, students graduate and then continue their studies for four additional years at either Athens, Greece or Constantinople, Turkey.
It is interesting to note the length of time required to prepare a Greek Priest for his Ministry, and it is also noteworthy to accredit the sincerity of purpose which has brought the Greek congregation of this Charlotte Church into such eminence and respect among the other denominations of the city.
Prior to 1919 there were comparatively few Greek people in Charlotte, but those few were, as all people of their race, imbued with a depth of religious fervor and sincere longing for religious expression.
Accordingly in 1919 in co-operation with St. Peters Episcopal Church, this small group of ten men and women met in St. Peters Parish House to hold their first service.
In the comparatively few years that most of them had resided in Charlotte, it had not been easy to establish themselves successfully in the business and civic life around them, and it was difficult now to support their church as they desired. But, despite financial limitations and discouragements, they labored on together in an effort to organize a church body.
In a few months after their first informal meetings the attendance increased and they were compelled to secure larger quarters, so they moved to the Chamber of Commerce building.
At this time, having no regular Priest, their congregation was supplied from Charleston, S. C, Columbia, S. C., and other cities, when a Priest was available; lay-readers conducted the other services.
Soon after regular services got under way they
September 14th, 1939
Charlotte Greek study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer.
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser.
Charlotte Chapter
Of
Sons of Pericles
Sons of Pericles
The Sons of Pericles is a National Greek-American organization of more than two hundred Chapters with a membership of over eight thousand in the United States and Canada. The first Shapter was organized in Manchester, N.H. in 1927. Its growth has been steady and inspiring. A National Convention is held annually. The 1939 convention being held at Providence, R.I., the 1940 convention being scheduled for Seattle, Wash.
The Charlotte, N.C. Chapter was organized in June 1934- with Nick Pappas as President. Its initial membership was nineteen. Members are given unlimited opportunity for free expression of their opinions regarding spiritual, educational and political matters.
The Charlotte Chapter with the following officers! Nick Papas, Pres., Jas Anderson, Vice Pres., Steve G. Pappas, Sec, Jas. Floros, Treas., in District No.3 embracing the following states: North Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, District of Columbia, Maryland and Delaware.
The object of this society, according to the wording of their charter is, "To promote better citizenship and to keep alive the ideals and customs of Greek parents, and to blend into a closer harmony the uplifting elements of Greek- American understanding". To this end a strict censorship is demanded of all prospective members and no boy who has had any criminal or moral entanglements is permitted to Join.
In order to stimulate interest in the Chapter and to broaden the scope of its endeavors, they are publishing a newspaper which has proved to be an instrument of news and education to other Chapters This paper, the "Victorian" is published quarterly in Charlotte and has a circulation of four hundred copies, pays its expenses from its advertisements and is sent to all parts of the United States.
It is the only paper of its kind in the United States, other Chapters use the mimeographeform, while the "Victorian" is printed on high grade book paper in magazine style.
The Charlotte Chapter is co-operating with other organizations in purchasing ground for a park to be used as a recreational center for the development of sports, including basketball, baseball, track and field sports, in which many Greeks excel. One member of the local Chapter has been awarded a scholarship at Elon College, N.C. and expects to play baseball during his college career.
The young Greeks are exceedingly proud of their organization and, as their President expressed it: "We hope to make it an important link in the chain of American educational and fraternal societies."
September 18th, 1939
Charlotte Greek study
Frank. B. Rupert, Writer.
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser.
Charlotte Chapter
Of
The Woman 's Club of the Greek Church.
Following the example of many of the other women of Charlotte, being in accord with their ideals in religious observanceses and with an earnest desire to share with them in the many programs for civic and social betterment, the Greek women organized in 1926 their own woman's Club which is in reality an auxiliary of the Greek Church.
At present their membership numbers thirty, all being married, with American born wives of Greek men receiving equal benefits as the native Greek women.
Though closely associated with the Church and sponsoring many programs of a religious nature, the Club is earnestly interested in all civic projects, social service enterprises, and charities of a personal and city-wide scope, and meets twice a month to transact much business.
In order to have a share in the support of their Church, they sponsor bountiful suppers, also entertainments of various kinds at which they act as chaperones for the young people.
More and more each year the Woman's Club of the Greek Church is making its influence felt in the life of the city.
Their society is an auxiliary in thought, word and deed.
November 6, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
GREEK CENSUS
GREEK CENSUS
The Greek: population of Charlotte, N. C. as of October 15, 1939, furnished by Andrew Pappas of the Southern Fruit Co. and Rev. Chrysostomus Papalambrou, Pastor of the local Greek Church, arrived at by personal visitation and by the church records, is as follows;
Families, 75; Males, 250: Females, 150: Adults, 175: Children, 225: Single Adults, 23: Average size of family, 5; Largest Family, 8. Of this number 150 are foreign born.
From 1934 to date the Greek Church records show there were: marriages, thirteen; Divorces, None; Deaths, twenty-one.
The record of births dating from 1928 is as follows: 1928, 1; 1930, 1; 1931. 9; 1952, 1; 1933, 9; 1934,14; 1935, 21; 1936, 15; 1937, 10; 1938,8; 1939, 12. Total 101.
There are 15 girls and 10 boys* under 15 years of age, enrolled in the Greek school They attend classes of two hour's duration four days each week. Those over fifteen enrolled consists of 15 females and 10 males, attending classes only one day each week.
These classes are conducted in the Greek Orthodox Church by the resident priest; the principal subjects being Greek Language and History, and the original Greek Version of the New Testament.
During the school year 1938-39 twelve adults received regular instruction in writing and speaking English from Adult Education Teachers of the WPA.
September 26, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
GREEK FOOD
While the average Greek restaurant in Charlotte wisely eaters to the taste of their American patrons, serving steaks; ham, prepared in various styles; per-colated coffee, even has and eggs, and sandwiches; they give free rein to their native appetites in their homes and other places where their own people are to partake.
Barbecue lamb Is perhaps the favorite dish. Baked chicken with a rich sauce called Kapasa, is a close second choice Kapama is a combination of tomato and much seasoning. The chicken is simmered or smothered under cover until tender, and the Kapama used often with the addition of various vegetables.
American lard and substitute compounds are not regarded favorably; the native Greek cook uses only butter and olive oil in the preparation of their very special dishes, the oil being imported.
Cheese is very popular and a variety called Feta, made of goat's milk, is most frequently used in a Greek household.
Combination salads, anchovies and ripe olives find conspicuous place on the daily menu and even spaghetti, cooked tender in salt water and served with a side dish of grated Parmesian cheese, is a general favorite.
The usual hot and zesty seasoning found in most Greek food preparations give it a characteristic all of its own, and Greek cooks are Justly proud of this oulinary ability.
The coffee must be ground to a powder and boiled until a certain amount of rich sediment settles in the bottom of the cup, and with this is served, for unexpected company, a small and delicious rich cake called Kouramble.
Wines of many varieties are a conspicuous adjunct of every meat Mastioa and Retsina are light wines for lunch and supper, (the Mastioa requiring a goodly portion of water mixed with it.)
And a favorite with the men guests is always Metaxas, a cognac brandy of rich and tasty quality.
Loaf bread is very important too. Long loaves shaped pumpernickel but made of wheat instead of rye are out in thick slices and piled high on the bread dish.
Foods most preferred by the Greeks may be termed, rich, substantial and tasty; served in combinations which assure a well balanced diet.
September 25, 1939
Charlotte Greek Study
Frank B. Rupert, Writer
Dudley W. Crawford, Reviser
TOM CONDUS
(Church Janitor)
Tom Condus is the American name of a small white-haired Greek, whoso sunny smile and amiable disposition marks him as a man who has cultivated the habit of getting the most fun possible out of life This estimate of Tom is borne out by the following story of his life:
"I was born near Macedonia, Greece in 1880. My parents were poor: my father being a goat herder. When I was old enough I went to school for three years and then went to work with my father helping with the goats.
"When I was about 16 years old I got a small herd of my own I kept my goats in the hills in summer and drove them down into the valleys in the winter where it was warmer As my herd got larger I sold the milk which was used for making choose, and the money I gave to my father.
"In 1904 when I was twenty four years old I had six hundred goats, so I got married My wife helped no taka care of my hard and in 1905 I decided to come to America, as I had heard it was a wonderful country I went from Athens to Naples Italy in a small boat.
Sailing from there to Beston, Mass in a large boat. We were twenty days crossing the ocean. I had a good time on the boat, plenty of wine and not sick.
"I was in Boston about a week and then I went to Lowell, Mass I got a Job in a cotton mill working on a drawing framo at is a week, I worked there for a month and then got a Job in a cotton mill at Buffolk. I worked in the picker.
room for $7 a week After working there about a month the dust and dirt made me sick and I quit I than got work: it a shoe factory in Lowell, Mass I did not like the work, it was too hard, so after a month I left.
"I went to Manchester, W. H., there I got work at the Amoskeag Mill scrubbing floors a in the weave room. I wanted to learn to weave, so all my spare time I helped the weavers. After about four weeks scrubbing floors the boss put me in the weave room to learn. I worked two months with no pay and then I started weaving, getting $8 a weak for running a set of eight looms. I worked on this Job a year. Then went back to lowell and got work in a woolen mill weaving blankets. I worked there about three months."
At this point Tom said "I could always get work, but never stayed long in one place."
"After leaving Lowell I went back to Manchester, N. H to the Amoskeag Mill working as a weaver about two and a half years.
"In 1908 I went home to Greece on the same boat that I came to America on, I paid $24.00 for my ticket and had $200.00 in my pocket.
"I was in Greece for a year with my family and friends and had a good time.
"In 1909 I returned to America, going again to Lowell. Mass., where I had many friends I went to work in a cotton mill, weaving, and stayed there a year.
"In 1910 my cousin who lived in San Francisco, Cal., where he had a large shoe shining parlor, wrote to me telling me what a fine piece it was, so I went out there and worked with him for two years.
"In 1912 he sold out his business and went back to Greece to fight in the Balkan War, I stayed in San Francisco about three months after he left, working in a cigar factory, I did not like the work so I quit.
"Late in 1912 I went back to Lowell, Mass., getting work in the weave room at e cotton mill and worked there for two years. In 1914 I went to Manchester, N.H., where I worked for four years as a weaver at $20. A week. I got tired of Manchester, so went to mill at New Bedford, Mass., where I worked two years.
"In 1920 I went to a mill at jewitt City, Conn., where I ran twenty looms making $50 to $60 some weeks. I worked there four years.
"I had saved a little money so in 1924 I went out to San Francisco, Gal. again and opened a small shoe shining place of my own I liked it there, good weather, pretty parks, plenty places to rich and nice people After I was there a big labor fight started and the big fellows run all the little fellows out of business and I lost of my money.
"I left San Francisco going to a little place, In southern California, named Hamilton. I worked in a sugar factory there for three or four months and had enough money to come back Rost.
"I had heard that there were many cotton mills in the south so went to Spartanburg, S. C, The first day I was in Spartanburg I went to the sparten Mill. I asked a men in the mill,' There the boss? 'At dinner' he  said I asked how much weavers made and he said$30 to $33. I told him that would not pay pay board and buy oigaretts and left. I went to the Railroad Station and asked the ticket man what the fare was to Utics, N. Y., he  told me $32.00 I did not have that much money so I went to work in a little mill outside of Spartenburg where I worked a month*
"When I left South Carolina I came to Charlotte,  went to work at Highland Park Mill and worked there for 12 or 13 years. About a year ago the boss let me out saying I was getting too old I told him O.K, by me.
" I now take care of the Greek Church, get $4. a week and a nice room in the church which is a good Job for an old man.
"No, I never was naturalized. I took out my first papers in New Hampshire in 1918. I was going to join the Army but was not accepted so I never took out my other papers.
l am not like other Greeks I never saved my money when I was young I wanted a good time, plenty of wine, lots of girls and everything; that is why I am a poor man."
