SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE HOW BRANSON'S BULLDOG COURAGE WON
Date of First Writing	February 28, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Richard E. Broome
Fictitious Name	Raymond E. Branson
Street Address	5433 Wilson Boulevard
Occupation	Attorney at Law
Name of Writer	Stiles M. Scruggs
Name of Reviser	State Office
It was a crisp, sunny day in February when I called at the law office of Raymond E. Branson act 1341 Main Street. He was sitting with his back to the door, with his feet on a vacant chair, reading a lawbook. He shouted a cordial "Come in," in reply to my knock. He laid aside his book and rose to his feet as I entered: "Your's is a Welsh name, I think," he said, extending his hands. Going on rapidly, he said with a chuckle. "The difference between the Irish and the Welsh is that the Welsh stopped fighting a thousand years ago, and the Irish never have quit."
All this time I was taking a mental picture of Mr. Branson. He is five and a half feet high. His heavy brown hair falls over his head in such confusion that it reminds me of a brush heap. His jaws are high and firm, and his chin stands out very prominently. His blue eyes are cordial but defiant. He throws back his ample shoulders when he stands. As I spoke of his general appearance, he explained, "The boys at the Cedar Creek public school nicknamed me 'B.D.' which they told me stood for bulldog. because, they said, I had a dogged way of holding on and a determination to win or die."
As I stated the object of my visit, Mr. Branson listened, then said: "In that case, you might as well write down obstacles and vicissitudes at the start of our ramble, for trail has been through flint rocks and oak stumps from the beginning of my life forty-six years ago to this good day of our Lord in 1939." Then Mr. Branson went along over his route in this fashion:
"I was born on a farm near Cedar Creek, in Fairfield County, South Carolina, on January 9, 1893. My parents were Jacob Branson and Ann (Bickley) Branson. Mother told me once that my life began about 3 o'clock on the morning of that winter day during a violent storm of winds, rain, and sleet. I have often thought of that day, because my career to date has been stormy and full of barriers. But the hickory tree on our farm soon taught me a lesson. I noticed it was buffeted by the same wind that blew down the pine, but it stood up straight when the sun shone.
"Father and Mother took more time and interest in helping me with my lessons than they did the ether children, because I was the only child that was prone to study my books at night after the chores had been done. The year that I started to the public school, in 1900, when I was seven, my father died. That was a severe blow to the family. Mother was left with eleven children, and the hardships increased as time passed. The farm embraced 140 acres. The land was sandy, and it would not produce good crops unless expensive fertiliser was applied, and this cost money.
"We had three mules, three cows, and some hogs. The oldest boy did the plowing, while the remainder of the children, we included, chopped cotton and hoed corn and potatoes. To me, the summers were long and hard. Still, we did pretty well in farming, so far as living and paying taxes were concerned. I insisted on going to school during the fall, winter, end early spring; and Mother took my side of the controversy. The other children did not care to attend school regularly. Instead, they always had work at home. When the ground was too wet to work, they out and hauled wood.
"This sort of program filled all the years of my early life, and we had a tug-of-war to get by on the farm. Yet it kept the home together." One day Mother came by as I was intensely reading a copy of the 'Tale of Two Cities,' by Charles Dickens. She smiled and said that she was happy because I loved books. 'You are wise in striving to prepare to make your living without becoming a farmer,' she said. I instantly thought of some poor tenant farmers then living in the Cedar Creek neighborhood.
"I had finished the public school curriculum in 1908. I was then fifteen years old, and I worked at a neighborhood sawmill most of the time from 1903 until 1912. I was only nineteen years old, but I got a man's wage at the sawmill, which averaged about $2.50 a day. Most of this wage went into the family budget, and I am not sorry of it, for I wouldn't have been the right sort of a lad if I hadn't aided my mother in her effort to bring up a family in the way it should go.
"In 1912, I entered a competitive examination at Winnsboro for a University of South Carolina scholarship. There were about thirty-five young man in the contest, and they all showed a keen interest in the contest. I was the only contestant from Cedar Creek, and the son of lawyers and rich farmers looked at me as if I didn't count. But that spirit only increased my earnestness. I applied myself there with all the energy of my mind. When the hour expired, we turned in our questions and answers and were told that the winner would be announced in a day or two. Mother got notice from the Winnsboro newspaper that I had won before she received the judged verdict.
"Mother did everything she could to raise money for my entrance at the university. But she could raise only thirty-two dollars. The scholarship certificate was valuable. It admitted me to room and classes free of charge, but there were such pressing needs as board, incidentals, washing, and clothes. Hence, the thirty-odd dollars I carried there were hardly a drop in the bucket. I explained my predicament to the president and faculty, and they got busy. I was soon paying my board by waiting on the table at the mess hall. In a few days, I got a chance to make three dollars, by selling shoes up town on Saturday. This sum served for my incidentals.
"From 1915, through 1916, during my freshman, sophomore, and junior semesters, I followed this plan in general. But it took more money than I had, so I sold life insurance during the periods that I was out of school. This kept me up late at night studying my lessons. In the fall of 1916 and the spring of 1916, I taught country schools and saved all I could that way. Early in 1917, the draft board sent me to Camp Jackson, where I was to train for overseas service.
"At Camp Jackson, I peeled potatoes, swept floors, or did soma kindred work dally, in addition to drilling twice a day. One day, nearly three months after I entered Camp Jackson, I was mustered with a large number of other young men to entrain for New York, where a transport would take us to France. There a keen-eyed doctor gave us a rigid examination end discovered certain disabilities in me that cut me out. I was given an honorable discharge after serving at Camp Jackson eighty-two days.
"I returned to my mother's home in Fairfield County end did my share of the work on the farm, as it was too late for me to get a job teaching school. In 1921, I returned to the university, with the ardent hope that I could work my way through to an A.B. academic degree and an L.L. D. degree in law. My expenses that year were much greater than they had been. Books coat more; better clothes were required; and even incidentals were dearer. I was unable to get any odd jobs, and I was soon behind with my board bill end other obligations. I was so determined to win my degrees that I almost grew ill over the vicissitudes I was facing.
"One morning, following a restless, almost sleepless, night, I went to the law office of Senator James H. Hammond and told him of my predicament. Mr. Hammond as courteous end sympathetic, but he explained he was a poor men and hadn't any money to loan. I kept talking. Suddenly Hr. Hammond wheeled around facing his desk, apparently making a notation. Then he revolved his chair and faced me again, he handed me a check for one hundred and twenty-five dollars. I was pretty well overcome when I realised what had happened, but I told Mr. Hammond I would return the money in sixty days.
"With money to supply all my wants till June, 1922, I soon found more work than I could attend to, and my anxiety was lessened. I pressed on and won my degrees, A.B. and L.L. D., the following June, 1922. And I didn't let the grass grow under my feet after that victory was won. I opened up my law office about the first year as July and began practice. Clients came slowly at first. I talked with older members of the bar, and they told me they almost starved during their fir at year as a lawyer. I bent to the task of building up a practice, and clients began to increase. But they were people of limited moans, and I had to work hard to earn enough to take care of my expanses and leave enough for as to live on.
"In the meantime, I had great luck. Mr. Hammond's kindness shoved me over the poverty barriers in the late winter days of 1922, and I earned considerable money. My relatives had some luck, too, and they sent me a substantial sum. So, at the end of sixty days, I was able to walk around to Mr. Hammond's office and pay him $125, as per promise. He was amazed when I paid him. 'I thought you would pay me sometime,' he said, 'but I certainly didn't expect you to pay it in sixty days.'
"As my practice increased, I began to think of my one and only romance. I had met kiss Cleo Shealy two years before. We decided to got married as soon as we could pull out of the financial fog, and both of us kept watch on our progress. About December 1, 1923, we decided that we could safely make the marriage grade. And, on December 23, 1923, we married and want to housekeeping at 6433 Wilson Boulevard. We still reside there. At first, we didn't entirely own the home. But we had faith in ourselves and paid the mortgage off in a few years.
"In 1925, I became a candidate for the House of Representatives in the South Carolina General Assembly. I won that election and the two succeeding elections and served in the House from 1926 to 1932. This service in the legislature taught as much. The candidate on the stump, seeking election, is generally an optimist. He promises many things that may never happen. I was cooksure I could secure many benefits for the people, but, when the moment came to act, I found many opponents an any given proposition.
"I know now that human nature, being what it is, never permits us to be completely content. If we possess a thousand dollars, we are not content until we have another thousand dollars, and so on to the end of the world. Such is the endless chain of life, and we never reach complete happiness on this planet. I came away from the State House somewhat saddened, but much wiser than when I entered it services there, I think, aided my law practice. Although the whole country was just plunging into the depression, business picked up wonderfully for me. I have, since 1926, specialized in civil practice, particularly in realty.
"There hasn't been a single year, since 1932, that my practice has netted ms less than $3,000 a year. This civil practice of law is more profitable than the criminal practice. And I like it better, because it takes me out of the environment of the criminal world. I am a retained attorney for the Columbia Federation of Trades, and at present two or more other civic organizations are negotiating with me for similar engagements.
"I am called on for many addressee by civic social, and business organizations. That is why I have compiled this typewritten book of 1,106 jokes." Here Mr. Branson picked up a volume and began to finger it. A single jokes." credited to the late President Calvin Coolidge, may serve as an example: "The President was reading a newspaper in his office, and his stenographer, standing at the window, said: 'There is Senator William Borah, a horseback ride.' Without looking, the President asked: 'Are the Senator and the horse going in the same direction?'"
"When I was studying law at the University of South Carolina, Judge M.L. Bonham, now a member of the Supreme Court of South Carolina, spoke to the law classes. His impromtu address was full of practical ideas for law students, but one particularly stuck with me. Justice Bonhom said, 'If a man stumbles, help him; if he lies down, don't!' I have made that epigram a sort of second nature, and I practice it studiously in my method of living along the way.
"When I began the practice of law in 1924, I saw the benefit of contacting other man, and, as I have always been a social person myself, I joined Acacia Blue Lodge of Masons, but I was not content to rest there. I pressed on and took the Scottish Rite from the fourth degree to the thirty-second degree. Then I joined the Odd Fellows, the Eagles, and the Junior Order of United American Mechanics. I find sufficient good in all these organisations to retain my membership in them. My wife became interested in those orders, and she is now a member of the Rebekah Lodge No. 6, the woman's organisation of the Odd Fellows.
"Mrs. Branson and I are also members of the Main Street Methodist Episcopal Church, and we attend there regularly. I consider it a high privilege to bow my knee to the triune God, even if I am, as some of my friends say, too dogged to bow to tyrants and some other dictators.
"I am inclined to think that I have about uncovered my life and the tug-of-war I have had to date. I as now in my forty-sixth year, and, within the next twenty years, I fully expect to blaze some new trails. To paraphrase John Paul Jones' fighting reply to his adversary, 'I have just begun to fight.'"
Approximately 3,200 words
83 C
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: A MERCHANT WIZARD
Date of First Writing	March 6, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	William M. Perry
Fictitious Name	John Randall
Street Address	2200 Divino Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Merchant
Name of Writer	Stiles M. Scruggs
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Pretty fair scene to have started from an accidental shoe string, and John Rendall's eyes roved contentedly over the fifty-six men and women busily working in his air-conditioned, well-lighted office. "Yep, it all started back in 1899, when I was a volunteer firemen. One night the court house was destroyed by fire, and I didn't know about it until the next morning. You see, the fire station was about a mile from where I lived.
"I was disappointed by missing the fire, so I got busy looking for a remedy. I began to collect old wire and a bell, and, with my own hands, I strung that wire from the fire station to my house. Whenever an alarm was sounded at the station, my bell rang, and I never missed another fire. "That home-made wire alarm attracted so much attention that I decided to quit my job and go into the electrical business. You see, back in those days, salaries weren't at all high. Than I was thirty-one years old and was making only $40 a month.
"But to start at the beginning. I was born in 1872, on a farm near Cottageville, Colleton County, South Carolina. My parents were Newman Randall end Margaret (Heyward) Randall. They moved to Columbia in 1874, when I was two years old. Father came here as marshal at the University a South Carolina. During his seven years in that role, he won a law degree. In later years, he practiced law in Columbia.
"My first big thrill came when, at the age of four, I saw Hampton's Red Shirts fall into line and march to the State House in 1876. We lived close to the Wallace House, at that time. Fast stepping, smartly dressed soldiers have always given me a thrill, and I guess that is why I have taken interest in good shooting and other out-of-door sports.
"My schooling was out short during my youth, because of political discord and confused social conditions, and it took pretty hard scratching in those days to get by. I first became a pupil of the Clarkson Private school at 1118 Lady Street, end later, in 1883, I finished the eighth grade in the public school. That's the sum total of my schooling. One year when I was in Ohio, some friends asked me what college I had finished in. When I told them the truth, they were amazed. What education I have above the eighth grade has been acquired in the school of experience.
"In 1885, I got my first job as a clerk in R. C. Davis' Racket Store. The racket store, you know, was the predecessor of the modern five-and- ten-cent store. One could buy anything from a tin cup to a paper of pins, and get it cheap. The pay there was low. I started at five dollars a week. I worked there two years and was drawing only seven dollars and fifty cents when I left there to start work at the McCrory store at ten dollars a week.
'That low scale of pay caused me to devote my leisure hours in search of a better job. One day I was lucky, and soon was working for Uncle Sam, as a special delivery messenger in the Columbia Post Office. I went to work there in 1888, and by 1890 I was superintendent of carriers. Although I was earning more than I had ever earned, I was not content, because I realized there was not a very bright future in post office jobs.
"The fact that I had blazed an alluring opening, through my home-made electric alarm, for a new sort of work, with a future to it, was not lost sight of by me. The very people who had poked fun at me during the const ruction of the alarm now came around to pat me on the shoulder and offer to pay me to perform similar services for them. While holding on to my post office job, I put in my spare time in electrical experiments and tested the possibilities of the potential electrical game.
"In 1903, when the paid fire department was established, I declined membership. I also quit my post office service late that year and established headquarters in electrical fixtures in a tiny room in a building where the Arcade building now stands. The rental for that room was three dollars a week, but I was clearing approximately as much money as I had earned when I was at the post office.
"The electrical business boomed throughout 1903 and the first quarter of 1904. By the end of 1904, I had established an electrical company. The company rented quarters in the Berkley building. There I was paying wages to thirty-two men and women employees. You know prosperity and panic are so close together that a business man may start out with prosperity and, like as not, walk a mile with panic before he discovers a change of companions.
"In 1906, an economic dip came along, and it had set in good before I noticed it. As it was, it gave me some sleepless nights and many prayerful days. The wall faced me, if my creditors should draw on me. I appealed to an old friend who could afford to aid as. And he told me to sit tight and hold on and he would come to my aid if they forced my hand. You know they didn't press me at all after I told them they could have the money, though it would be a sacrifice on my part. It reminds me of the old song, 'When You Get What You Want, You Don't Want It.' I thus met the economic dip and rode up the road until the bottom fell out of the financial barrel again in 1914. That year, the war in Europe shut off American exports. Business all over the South slumped fearfully. Cotton didn't move. And since that product is the money crop of the South, collections were practically nil. My business again hovered between life and death for months.
"I knew if I failed in 1914, all my struggle from the start would be in vain. I sought out an old friend, who was then in the banking business and was known as a financial wizard. He listened to me carefully and asked me to bring him my audit reports. I did so, and he authorised me to draw on him to the extent of $25,000, if need be. Again that aid saved me, without the actual passing of much money.
"An economic panic is like an earthquake. It hits all alike. A business firm, particularly without a reserve fund, is bound to suffer at every whim of econimic dips. Up to 1915, my store had no reserve. In 1916, through the aid of friends, I bought out the interest of M.L. Mann and began at the same time to put by a reserve fund for future eventualities and emergencies. The reserve aided me wonderfully when periods of business slackness came along. And, I'm telling you, upsets in economic affairs are about as certain to happen over the years as death and taxes.
"However, our reserve fund was soon exhausted, when the so-called depression of 1929 hit the whole world such a calamitous blow that it has not yet fully recovered from the shock. When money takes a nose dive, people get scared, and panic jumps into the saddle. Our store was on a limb again in 1932, and for some years following. People who needed our products, and could have paid for them, were afraid to buy, while the great rank and file of our customers were not financially able to buy what they actually needed.
"It took many strong pulls to play even for some years, because my overhead expense was about the same, and trade was out down fully fifty percent. My anxiety was increased because I was loath to reduce the number of my employees. I had to let out a few. The other business houses also faced the same predicament, and that turned loose the millions of unemployed in the United States. As 1935 dawned, however, store was stabilized and I was able to reemploy those I had dropped, by taking a pay out in profits all around.
"Since 1935, with the Government earnestly striving to aid, our custom- era gradually got their feet on the ground, and we pressed on. In 1938, this store, which began in a cubbyhole approximately forty years ago, and with a three-dollar rental, is occupying it is own $12,000 building. It is paying fifty-six man and women good salaries, five of them $6,000 a year. My income for 1938 was approximately $32,000, and I paid slightly more than $4,000 in Federal income taxes. I believe South Carolina has seen the worst of the depression. And our outlook for 1959, so far, gives us reason to hope that we may do even better this year than we did in 1938.
"At a mass meeting in Columbia, I was unanimously chosen president of the Richland County Federal Relief organisation. The man who put me in nomination paid me this tribute: 'Mr. Randall has done more public welfare work, without pay, than any other man in the city.' Whether that statement la so or not, I have never neglected a chance to serve the people; nor have I forgotten that a citizen should serve his community When he sees a chance to aid in making it a better place in which to live.
"It was love for my fellow man that notivated me to teach the Columbia police and State patrolmen how to use firearms efficiently. I mastered the shooting game myself, and it is a pleasure to me to instruct others. When, at first practice, I put four out of five shots in the bull's-eye, the police showed interest. And when I did about as well with a revolver as I did with a rifle, they cheered.
"The War Department pays the expenses of sharpshooters for two weeks at Camp Perry, Ohio, and I take a number of good marksmen there during the National Rifle Matches. I try out the applicants who wish to go to the matches, and if one fails to put three out of every five shots in the bull's- eye, he doesn't make the grade. A great number of excellent shooters gather at Camp Perry every year. I think it was due to my ability and interest in these events there that caused the trustees to bestow on ms the rank of captain. It was due to similar interest in the Boy Scout movement that caused the National organization to honor me with the Silver Beaver trophy.
"I am a member of Masonic bodies and the Shrine Club, the Knights of pythias, the Odd Fellows, and the Elks. I give these orders a great deal of my time in coaching applicants, and contribute to them when they need funds. I also serve my church faithfully, having served as Senior Warden at the Church of the Good Shepherd, which is the highest title bestowed on a layman.
"My domestic and social life has been full and, for the most part, very happy. I was married to Miss Jusnita Frost in 1390, at Wilmington, North Carolina. We had five daughters and one son, John L. Randall, who is now the vice president of the store. The daughters are married. Today I have nine grandchildren. Mrs. Randall died in 1930. In 1934, I was married a second time, to Mrs. Guy Mason, of Columbia. We reside at 2200 Divine Street, Columbia. That is the first and only home I have lived in since 1890, when I married the first time.
"Some one has said that life is a dream, and we know not when we sleep or when we wake, which is equal to saying that no casis, has been reached by me without a struggle, sweat, and anxiety. To have won a little success in a work-a-day world, which has been topsy-turvy a great deal of the time, is a great pleasure to me."
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: JASON C. NYE
Date of First Writing	January 7, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Charles L, Sligh (white)
Fictitious Name	Jason C. Nye
Street Address	1707 Heyward Street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Florist
Name of Writer	S. M. Soruggs
Name of Reviser	State Office
Jason C. Nye shouted a cordial "Come in," when I called at his floral store in the Wright's Hotel building on Main Street. lie ms busy inspecting an array of beautiful and costly-looking funeral designs. With the words, "I'll be with you in a moment or two." he waved me to a seat.
While waiting. I watched his handsome figure moving back and forth. as he critically eyed the designs) a bit over six feet in height, he looked, and weighing well over two hundred. He was wearing a newly creased suit of gray - the coat dark, the trousers of lighter hue with narrow stripes - with a tie striped in red and white. His eyes, big and brown, were expressive of the brisk energy with which he moved and of the cheery tone of his voice. Crowning his profile was a bushy mass of fart graying hair.
His inspection finished end his assistant instructed as to the shipment of the designs to some distant town, he come over and took a seat opposite me. "Your superb fora and elegance of dress," I told him, "would make as think you are an Englishman, were it not for your energised American manner. And the red carnation in your lapel, is it a habit or just a special circumstance?"
"A habit," he answered. "I've worn some such bouquet every day since I began floral business. My wife jokes as about it, saying it's my way of showing to customers that I practice what I preach. It is more than that. I love flowers and what they express in life."
Then the purpose of my visit was explained. "Life story," he repeated. "Oh, well, why not? But nine has been the life of a plodder. Nothing exciting or spectacular to make a story of. Nothing dark end sinister. My relations with sheriffs and policeman have always been the friendliest. It's just the life of a country boy who came to town and built for himself a small business.
"My parents, long ago passed over the river, were Dickens Sutton Nye and Hattie Hooks Nye. I was born on my father's plantation in Newberry County, South Carolina, on Ney 17, 1884. There I spent my childhood and early youth. In the autum and winter I attended the old field school, and in the spring and summer I worked on the fans, hoeing cotton, corn, potatoes and other plants on our plantation at that time. One night think that a family living on a good farm and working it intensively would have all the heart could wish for, but it was not always the case an our plantation. There were lean years, some very lean.
"Sometimes our cotton crop was cut by lack of rain just when the plants must have moisture. At other times there would be so much rain that the plants would go to bush instead of boll. This cotton was our means of getting sufficient money to pay taxes, buy clothes and other necessities to wear and eat. It's failure also meant the lack of money to pay debts, no matter how pressing. And other crops, such as corn and potatoes, frequently failed because of weather conditions. One example may be given. The summer before we quit farming, there was a great wind and hail storm. Our corn was just beginning to tassel. After the storm passed, father and I want to see how the crop had stood it. The sight was sickening. Much of the corn had been broken down, and the rest, though still rooted and whole, was lying as flat as a pancake.
"Sorrowfully we viewed the ruins of the crop that had looked so fine and promising. Nothing could be done about it that late. Toil, money, and hopes were gone with the wind and hail. That fall we made only about fifty percent of a crop. The Irish potatoes, too, were short, due to hordes of ladybugs on the vines. In fact, every crop that year was out by drought or bugs. Our watermelons were short. We wore a blue family as winter began to approach. Debts wore pressing us for payment, and we had nothing to sell that would bring the amounts we needed. The old saying of, 'Let the other fellow do the worrying,' isn't a bright joke to the man who wishes to treat his fellow man in the same spirit as he would have his fellow man treat him.
"The situation I am describing was our experience in 1898. And lean years were a common affliction to farmers in Newberry County. Weather conditions are one of the gambles the farmer baa to take any year. The disasters of 1898, though among the worst, were typical of frequent occurrences.
"That winter I heard my parents seriously discuss the subject of quitting the farm. One night as we were seated around a roaring wood fire, Father said, 'Mamma, I have been thinking of leaving the farm and engaging in something that is less uncertain about making a living.'
"Mamma replied, without stopping her knitting! 'But, Papa, there is a hazard in most everything. I'm reminded of it by experience I had when I was a little girl. We had a water mill, and ground corn and wheat for the community. We could hear the water falling over the embankment from the house. One day after about eighty-two hours of rain, Mother told me to go down under the hill and see if the mill was all right. I did. The mill wasn't there, and it excited me so I ran all the way home and shouted; "Mother, it's all gone but the dam."'
"To this Father rejoined: 'But Mother, I'm not aiming to engage in the milling business. A well conducted grocery store in a populous community ought to support our family, and I think I know a locality in Columbia where the trade ought to be brisk. My plan would be to trust in God, but all others must pay cash, or the goods would remain on the shelf.'
" 'That plan sounds safe enough, but I wonder if we can sell the farm for enough to pay debts and get settled at it in the capital city,' said Mother. Well, the Nye farm was for sale from that night's counsel around the old home fire.
"There was one man in that district who owned great forests of valuable timber and many across of land, and he always seemed to have money to buy what he wanted, whether crops were lean or fat. He heard the Nye farm was for sale, and one day he rode over and took dinner at our house. Afterward, as he and father sat smoking, he said: 'What's this I hear about you quitting farming and going to practice law or something.' Father replied. 'I am ready to sell one of the best plantations in Newberry County, but there need be no comedy about it.'
"The dickering on price commenced then and lasted until nightfall. fore he left, the visitor put up a sum of money as a forfeit for the contract to be drawn up and closed at the courthouse next day. The price try father received for the farm was far less than it could be bought for today, but it was considered a fair trade then.
"Soon the packing and loading of household effects began. The sale of hogs, cattle, and other things was carried on at the same time. And pretty early in 1399 we were in Columbia, searching for a house to live in and a building to sell groceries in. I think we remained at a boarding house only two weeks before we began the game of living in a big town and doing where competition in all commercial lines was brisk.
"But father was pretty long-headed, and he was determined to succeed. The store soon began to pay, and it kept paying. That is, we got our food, or a large share, from it; and the cash sales generally brought sufficient funds to pay for the goods we retailed, and a slight surplus for our clothing and other necessary needs.
"In the Columbia set-up, the throe big, oversized boys and their two sisters had plenty of good, wholesome food, but we had practically no pending money, like most of our boy acquaintances had. One reason was that it took more and better clothes for us children in Columbia it would have required on the plantation. We boys all helped father at the store, and picked up small change, when we got the chance, by running errands for people or doing other odd jobs. The grocery store, with plenty of competition, just wouldn't support our family in any sort of luxury. The struggle we experienced on the plantation, and in Columbia later, may have been a blessing in disguise. For we became more appreciative of money, and less disposed to spend it foolishly.
"My two brothers are doing pretty well. Toole is manager of the Studebaker Automobile Agency in Columbia. Our kid brother, J.E. Nye, is an engineer of the South Carolina State Highway Department. My two sisters are both happily married. They are Mrs. H. C. Tate, of Hendersonville, North Carolina, and Mrs. P. A. Hodges, of Columbia. My own business brings an income of about $2,500 a year. My wife has income-producing property. We have no dependent children. So we both pay State and Federal income taxes.
"We sometimes talk about our youthful days in Columbia. Only the other day my brother, Toole, was telling me about how I acted in 1904, when I was twenty years old and began my first job at the Stork greenhouses in Columbia. I began work there for fifty cents a day. The duties of the job included keeping the heat at a certain temperature in the winter end giving the right amount of moisture to certain expensive flowers. All told, I think I earned my fifty cents a day, even when I began.
"It takes years of physical and mental labor to gain sufficient knowledge of flowers to make any sort of success in the florist business. The flower is a characteristic feature of the highest group of the plant kingdom. Flowers of commerce are produced from flower buds, just as leaf shoots arise from leaf buds. These two kinds of buds have a resemblance to each other as regards the arrangement and the development of their parts. Flower buds, like leaf buds, are produced in the axial leaves, which are called bracts. This is what I mean by the statement that it is no easy job to acquire proficient knowledge of the florist business.
"For eight years I studied, experimented, and worked at the Stork greenhouses. Even then, I knew little about flower culture. The constant bending of one's back in this work, however, makes one feel at night like he had put in a day's work. My wages increased at Stork's as my efficiency progressed, but I never did make money there as one would do today. I was proud of my three dollars that I earned the first week at Storks. Over the years there, I carried away from the work an other Saturday nights several times more than three dollars, but I never got the same thrill from the start, at least that was my experience. The idea came to me about 1911 that a man should own his own business, if he would play safe, even if it is nothing but a peanut stand.
"So I quit at Stork's and began to look about for something I could make a living at. I had heard father declare many times that a shoemaker should stick to his last. I had given eight years to flower culture, and I decided to go into that business in a snail way. I had no money to speak of. I was fond of the girls, and a great deal of my wages faded along that trail. One day I met a friend, and I explained what was on my mind. He loaned me twenty dollars to aid me in starting.
"I started in business in a cubbyhole space in Thomas's Drug Store, for which I paid him three dollars a week rental. The Thomas Drug Store was in the sixteen hundred block of Main Street in 1912. The success I had pleased me. I soon paid my friend his twenty dollars. Sales were such that I lived, and my business increased until the cubbyhole space at Thomas's Drug Store was too small for me. I then rented a larger space at the Miot Drug Store at 1430 Main Street. In a year or two the business quarters at Miots become inadequate, and I leased these quarters in the Wright Hotel. Orders for flowers came from hotels, hospitals, funerals, and weddings. My sales were brisk. This normal demand for flowers increased tremendously in 1917, soon after troops began to mobilize at the Jackson Training Camp. By the spring of 1918, when there were from 40,000 to 50,000 men and officers at Camp Jackson, the influenza epidemic was taking a huge toll. The demand for flowers frequently was so great that all the florists in this community exhausted their supplies daily. Prices of everything were very high, and I made money rapidly.
"You ask if this florist business is dull and brisk by spells. Off hand, I would say it is not. It is one of the few industries that goes right along regardless of economic conditions. The reason is that deaths, marriages, and hospitals function right along, whether business is good or bad. Many designs, sometimes costly ones, are ordered for patients at the three hospitals in Columbia. Couples who get married do not count the cost; and when death knocks at the door, even if the family is a humble one, flowers are in demand. The florists kaleidoscope discloses a regularity of sales unknown in some other businesses.
"Married! yes. But not until late in life, 1925. It took ma a long time to learn a trade, and a longer time to win a wife. Between the ages of 15 to 40, I often fell in love with a pair of pretty eyes, a classy form, or a charming manner. But I never pressed a case to a climax, until I met Miss Eva Greishabar, a pretty girl of German parentage. She captivated me completely. And what a courtship we had for some years! I thought I knew a good deal about women, but I didn't. I don't know enough about them yet to hurt me.
"Miss Greishaber and I fought it out for several years before she surrendered. She and I would attend theaters and dine together. We would attend church, or we might go to picnics, but she appeared to be willing to let it go at that. One January day, Eva came to my store and we talked and laughed awhile. As she got ready to go, she said she had come to buy a half dozen rosebuds. I always told her she could take her choice of things here, without pay.
"I fixed up a beautiful and costly bouquet and presented it to her. She departed with a smile, and it must have been two hours afterwards, when I was working at the desk, that I discovered a folded ten-dollar bill. I told her about it, and she only laughed. Then she said, 'You are so careless, I wonder why you don't go broke.' The money obviously was hers, but she wouldn't take it. She know the value of roses in January as well as I did.
"It was shortly after that event, when I made up my mind to either win Eva as a wife or lose her. I thought of several plans that might work. but finally discarded all but the sympathy route. So I dolled up in my best togs and skipped around to Eva's house. She greeted me with enthusiasm, as usual. After we took seats in the parlor, I began to tell her what a dismal failure I was. Along that path, I said: 'I'm ashamed of myself, I've decided to go out to Texas and carve a fortune there. If I fail to get the chance out there, I can still walk to the bridge and jump, saying as I'm falling. "Here goes nothing."'
"Eva had listened with sympathetic eyes and a sardonic smile. As I finished my foolish talk she said: 'Jason you are ill. I'm afraid. What sort of a fortune do you expect to gain in Texas by talking like a sick parrot and acting like a monkey? For years I have passed up chances of marriage with other young men and stuck to you alone. Now you are threatening to walk out on me. You know you are the only boy I have ever loved, and so what ----'
"The scene has been hazy to me since, but I am told I grabbed Eva in my arms and poured out my heart to her in love. The very next day, August 17, 1925, we were married. We bought a pretty home at 1707 Heyward Street, Columbia, and we still reside at that address. We have continued to be pals, just like we were in the gay days before our marriage.
"None of the Nye children, who struggled on the plantation and in Columbia, are wealthy, but we all have work which assures us a living and reasonable happiness. And the sacrificial rows of stumps we stumbled through during our earlier years hardened our nerves and possibly made us fit for the duties we now perform.
"I am a member of the National Florist Association, and through this organization the business code is ironed out so that we serve each other about as efficiently as the international postal system does. For example, someone in London, England, or Winnepeg, Canada, or Seattle, Washington, wishes to send a floral design to some one in Columbia. They notify me in code, and the order is filled here by me. I have had that sort of business from these cities during the year 1938.
"I purchase my flowers and plants instead of going to a greater expense of producing them. The Shandon Greenhouse is a local wholesale floral concern. It furnishes me most of my supply. But in case I desire a special design that the local wholesaler does not have, I get it from a similar concern in Florida, New York, or Montreal. Express service generally answers, but if the speed emergency is greater, it comes by air service.
"My wife and I are members of Ebenazor Lutheran Church in Columbia. We were members there when we were married. If we should be absent from services for two consecutive Sundays, the chances are the Rev. Dr. P. D. Brown would come out to the house to see which one of us was ill.
"For many years I have been a member of Elks Lodge (B.P.O.E.) in Columbia. The social benefits I get from this fraternal order are very pleasing to me. I also am a member of Richland Lodge, No, 59 A.F.M., of Scottish Rite bodies in Columbia and of Omar Shrine Temple at Charleston.
"So my life has run through a little more than a half century - even and uneventful, but with the pleasure of knowing I have the good will and respect of neighbors and associates. And I look to the future with confidence and faith. Browning expressed the view in words something like the following: 'God is in the Heavens; all's well with the world.'"
Approximately 2,600 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
TITLE:
LIFE HISTORY ALWAYS FLOWERS
Date of First Writing	January 7, 1939
Name of Ferson Interviewed	Charles L. Sligh(white)
Fictitious Name	Jason C.Noye
Street Address	1707 Heyward street
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Florist
Name of Writer	S. M. Scruggs
Name of Reviser	State Office
"My wife jokes me about my wearing a fresh red carnation on the lapel of my coat every day, by saying I do so to show my customers that I practice what I preach. But she knows it's my love of flowers that accounts for my habit." And Charles L. Sligh smiled and looked at his bouquet.
"Oh, well, why not a life story?" mused Mr. Sligh. "But mine has been the life of a plodder. It is not in any sense a spectacular career to date, nor yet one with sinister climaxes. My relations have been exceedingly friendly with sheriffs and policemen, which is equal to saying that mine is the life of a country boy who came to town and lifted himself into a little business by tugging at his own bootstraps.
"I was born on my father's plantation in Newberry County, South Carolina, on May 17, 1884. There I spent my childhood and early youth. In The autumn and winter I attended the old field public school, and in the spring and summer I worked on the farm, hoeing corn, chopping cotton, setting out yellow yam sweet potato plants, and, in short, all each tasks as arise on a country plantation. Father and the entire Sligh family was industrious, and our farm was a good one, but crops were just as uncertain as any business I know about. Beginning in 1888, there were several lean years on our farm.
"Sometimes our cotton was cut short by lack of rain just when the plants needed moisture. And in other years there was too much rain, and the plant would bush, but bear few bells. Cotton was our chief money crop, and if it failed, we were pressed about paying taxes, or buying clothes and shoes. And other crops such as corn and potatoes failed because of weather conditions. One example may illustrate the point. The summer before we quit the farm, a greet wind and hail storm came along when our com was just beginning to tassel. After the storm passed, father and I went to see how the crop had stood it. The sight sickened us. Much of the corn had been broken, and the rest, though still rooted and whole, was as flat as a pancake.
"Sorrowfully we viewed the ruins of a crop which had looked so figorous and promising the night before. Nothing could be done about it so late in the season. Toil, money for fertilizer, and hopes were gone with the wind and the hail. The Irish potatoes, too, were short, due to lady bugs on the vines. In fact, that year, every crop was cut by drought, rain at the wrong time, or storm. We were a blue family as winter began to approach. Debts began to press us for payment, and we had nothing to sell to raise the amounts we so badly needed. The old joke about letting the other fellow do the worrying is not funny to the man who wishes to treat his fellow man in the same spirit as he would have the other fellow treat him.
"The situation I am describing was our experience in 1898, and similar lean years had been pretty common to farmers in Newberry County. Weather conditions are one of the gambles the farmer has to deal with any year The disaster of 1898, though, is typical of average seasons.
"That winter I heard my parents seriously discuss the subject of quitting the farm. One night, as we were seated before a rousing wood fire, father said, 'Mama, I have been thinking of leaving the farm and engaging in something that is less uncertain about making a living.'
"Mama replied, without stopping her knitting, 'But, Papa, there is a hazard to most everything. I'm reminded of it by an experience I had when I was a little girl. We had a water mill, and ground com and wheat for the neighborhood. We could hear the water falling over the embankment from the house. One day, after a long rainy spoilt my mother told me to run down to the mill under the hill and see if everything was all right. I did. The mill was not there, and I was so excited I ran all the way home and shouted: "Mother, it's all gone but the dam:"'
"After the laughter su bsided, following Mothrer's story, Father rejoined: 'But, Mother, I'm not aiming to engage in the mill business. Instead of that, I think a wellyconducted grocery store in a populous community ought to support our family. I think I know a locality in Columbia where the trade ought to be brisk. If I were running it, my plan would be to trust in God, but all others should pay cash, or the goods would remain on the shelf.'
"That plan sounds safe,' said Mother, 'but I wonder if we can sell the farm for enough cash to pay our debt's and still have sufficient money to get properly settled in business at the capital city.'
"The Sligh farm was up for sale the next day. That satisfactory counsel around the old home fire had convinced every one of us that change of base was a proper economic step. As soon as our crude 'For-Sale' sign was up, a buyer came to see us. There was at that time a man in the community who owned vast forests of timber and great acreage, and he always appeared to have money. He said he heard the Sligh farm was for sale and he decided to ride over and take dinner and discuss the sale, adding, 'I hear you're quitting the farm to practics law!'
"Father replied he would sell the beat farm in Newberry County for a fair price, but he saw no reason to put in the comedy about him quitting the farm to practice law. Dinner interrupted the bargaining, and afterward the investor and Father sat and smoked and dickered until nightfall. Meantime, the visitor's horse had twice been fed. supper was served, and soon the visitor put up a sum of money, to be forfeited if he failed to close the deal at the court house in Lexington next day. The price Father received for the farm was, perhaps, lees than it would bring today, but it was considered a pretty good price then.
"Soon afterward, the sligh family was busy packing and loading the house-hold goods, and in selling hogs, horses, and cattle. In the month of January, 1899, we were in Columbia, searching for a house to live in and a building to open a grocery store in. I think we remained at a boarding house only two weeks, before we began the game of living in a big town and doing business where competition in all commercial lines was keen and brisk.
"Father was pretty long-headed, and he was also determined to succeed. He never failed to tall a customer that he was not financially able to extend credit and that his safety required that he either keep his goods or powkny the cash. Operated on this sound principle, the store began to prosper. The Sligh family lived, to a great extent, on foods from our stors. And the cash sales were usually sufficient to pay for our goods and to Maura a surplus for clothing and other necessary needs.
"The three big, over-sized Sligh boys and their two sisters had plenty of good, wholesome food, but we had practically no spending money, like most of our boy and girl acquaintances had.
"We boys helped father at the store and picked up small change at other tasks elsewhere when we got a chance. The grocery store, with plenty of competition, just wouldn't support the family in any sort of luxury. And I, for one, was not prone to complain to father about my lack of spending money. The struggles we had on the plantation, and later in Columbia, may have been blessings in disguise. Anyhow, when we began to scratch for our own living, we knew the importance of money, and none of us wasted it.
"My two brothers are now doing pretty well. Toole is manager of the Studebaker Automobile Agency in Columbia. Our kid brother, J. E. Sligh, is an engineer of the South Carolina Highway Department. My two sisters are both happily carried. They are Mrs. H. C. Tate, of Hendersonville, North Carolina, and Mrs. P. A. Hodges, of Columbia.
"My business brings in an income of about $2,500 a year. Only the other day my oldest brother, Toole, was reminding me about how I noted when I began my first Job at the Stork greenhouses in Columbia, in 1904. I began work for fifty cents a day. The duties of the job included keeping the heat at a certain temperature in the winter and giving the proper amount of moisture to certain expensive flowers. All told, I think I earned my fifty cents a day.
"It takes years of physical and mental labor to gain sufficient knowledge of flowers to make any sort of success in the florist business. The flower is a characteristic feature of the highest group of the plant kingdom. Flowers of commerce are produced from flower buds, just as leaf shoots arise from le leaf buds. These two kinds of buds have a resemblance to each other as regarde the arrangements and the development of their parts. Flower buds, like leaf buds, are produced in the axial leaves, which are called bracts. This is what I mean by the statement that it is no easy job to acquire proficient knowledge of the florist business. For eight years I studied, experimented, and worked at the Stork greenhouses. Even then, I knew little about flower culture. The constant bending of one's back in this work, however, makes one feel at night like he had put in a days work. My wages increased at Stork's as my efficiency progressed, but I never did get as much as probably one would today. I was proud of my three dollars that I had earned the first week at Stork's. Over the years there, I carried away on several Saturday nights. more than three dollars, but I never got the same thrill from them. The fact that a youngster can earn money is always thrilling to him at the start; at least, that was my experience.
"In 1911, the idea came to me that, to succeed, a man should ova his own business, even if it were nothing but a peanut stand. So I quit at Stork's and began to look around for something I could make a living at. I had heard Father say many times that ' a shoemaker should stick to his last.' I had given eight years of my life to flower culture, and I decided to follow the old rule about 'sticking to the last' by beginning a florist business in a small way. I had no ready cash to speak of. I was fond of the girls and a great deal of my wages had already faded along that trail.
"One day I explained matters to a friend. He loaned me $20 to aid me in the starting. And I began business in a cubbyhole space in Thomas' Drug Store, for which I paid him three dollars a week rental. The Thomas Drug Store was in the 1600 block of Main Street in 1912. The success I had at the start pleased me. I soon paid my friend his $20, and sales were so good and regular that I lived and increased my business. The cubbyhole apace was now too small for me, and I rented a six -dollar space at Miot's Drug Store at 1430 Main Street. In a year or two the space again became too small, and I leased these quarters in the Imperial Hotel, where I am doing business now.
"Orders for flowers arrive regularly from hotels, hospitals, funerals, and weddings. These are frequently very expensive designs. In addition to these sales, there are orders from many private social gatherings and banquets. This normal demand increased tremendously in 1917, soon after troops began to mobilize at Camp Jackson far training. By the spring of 1918, when there were between 40,000 and 50,000 men and officers at Camp Jackson, the influensa epidemic was taking a heavy death toll. The demand for flowers frequently was so great that all the florists in this community exhausted their supply daily. Prices of everything were very high then, and I made money rapidly.
"This florist business is one of the few industries that goes right along, I might way, regardless of economic conditions. The reason is that deaths, marriages, and hospitals function right along whether business is dull or brisk. Many floral designs are ordered by patients at three hospitals hare in Columbia. Also couples who get married don't count the cost; and when death knocks at the door, even if the family is a humble one, flowers are in demand. The florists kaleidoscope discloses a regularity of sales unknown in some other business channels.
"Married? Yes. But not until late in life, 1925. It took me a long time to learn a trade, and a longer time to win a wife. Between the ages of 18 and 40, I often fellin love with a pair of pretty ayes, a classy form, or a charming manner. But I never pressed a case to a climax, until I mat Miss Eva Greishaber, a pretty girl of German parentage. She captivated ma completely. And what a courtship we had for some years! I thought I knew a good deal about women, but I didn't. I guess I don't know enough about them yet to hurt me.
"Miss Greishaber and I fought it out for many years before she surrendered. She and I would attend theatres and dine together. We would attend church, or picnics, but she appeared always ready to let it go at that. One January day, Eva came to my flower store, where we joked and talked for sometime. As she got ready to go, she said she had come to buy half a dozen rose- buds. I always told her she could pick her choice here without pay.
"I went ahead and fixed up a beautiful and costly bouquet and presented it to her with my moat courtly bow. She took it, smiled sweetly, and departed. Shortly afterwards, I was busy at the desk and discovered a $10-bill. I told her about it and she laughed. Then she said: 'You are so careless I wonder why you don't go broke.' The money obviously was here, but she wouldn't take it. She knew the value of resebuds in January as well as I did. It was in late summer that year that I fully made up my mind to either win Eva as a wife or lose her altogether.
"I thought of serial plans but finally descarded them ell but the sympathy route. So I dolled up in a new suit, with a very fresh red carnation on the coat lapel, and skipped around to Eva's home. She greeted me enthusiastically, as usual. After we were seated in the parlor, I began to tell her what a dismal failure I was. Among other things I said: 'I'm ashamed of myself, and I'm going out to Texas and carve a fortune there. If I fail there, as here, I can still walk to a bridge and jump, saying as I fall, "Here goes nothing!'"
"Eva had listened with sympathetic eyes and a sardonic smile. As I finished my foolish talk, she said: 'Charles, you are ill, I'm afraid. what sort of a fortune do you expect to gain in Texas by talking like a parrot and acting like a monkey? For years I have passed up chances of marriage with other young men and have stuck to you alone. How you threaten to walk out on me.' You know you are the only man I have ever loved and so what---'
"The scene that follow! I has been hazy to me since, but I'm told I grabbed Eva in my arms and poured out my heart to her in love. The very next day, August 17, 1925, we were married. We bought a pretty home at 1707 Heyward Street, Columbia, and we reside there now. We have continued to be pals, Just like we were in the days before our marriage.
"I am a member of the National Florists Association, and through this orgainzation the business code is ironed out so that we serve each other about as efficiently as the international postal system does. For example, some one in London, England, or Winnepeg, Canada, or Seattle, Washington, wishes to send a floral design to some one in Columbia. They notify me in code, and I fill the order.
"Knowing the greater expense of producing flowers, I have preferred to purchase them. I buy from the Shandon Greenhouse, a local wholesale florist concern. It furnishes me most of my supply. But in case I desire a special design that the local dealer doesn't have in stock, I get it from similar dealers in Florida, New York, or Montreal, Canada. Express service generally answers, but if greater speed is needed, the package comes by airplane.
"For many years I have been a member of the Elks Lodge (B.P.O.E.) in Columbia. I am also a member of Richland Lodge No. 59(A.F.M.) and Scotiah Rite bodies in Columbia, and of Omar Shrine Temple at Charleston. My wife and I are Members of Ebenezer Lutheran Church.
"So life has run through more than half a century, with plenty of struggle, but with rare satisfaction of knowing that I have Merited the good will and respect of my neighbors and business associates as I passed along."
MCB
Project #3613
Stiles M. Scruggs Columbia, S. C.
11-22-38.
LIFE STORIES
REECE N. WOOD,
(white()
119 WALKER STREET
COLUMBIA, S. C.
Reece N. Wood is a veteran journeyman printer whose itching feet have carried him from the smaller to the larger printing plant a in the United-States and whose experience covers many incidents peculiar to the printing craft. His response to the writer's call for an interview was immediately cordial. "Sure, I'll be glad to talk about my comings and goings."
"I became a printer's devil, looking for the mythical type lice, in 1885, when I was twelve years old. My father and mother were Rally Wood and Sybil (Taylor) Wood, and they moved to Columbia a year or two before I began the printing vocation. Father was a bridge builder, and he moved his family about the country as bridge construction became available to him. He had learned that trade before he had mother married, in 1859. Shortly after the wedding, they moved to Jackson, Mississippi, where father had a bridge contract.
"They were in Mississippi in 1861, when father sent mother to her home in Fairfield County, South Carolina and marched away with the Confederate troops to fight whom they then called damn Yankees. At the close of the War, in 1865, father came home to the Taylor plantation, with his right leg shattered by a Yankee bullet. He refused to quit the game of earning a living, and, after a few years work on Grandfather Taylor's plantation, he moved to Columbia and engaged in construction work. He lived until 1898, when he died of paralysis of the right side. He never fully recovered from the wound he received in 1864.
"I was born in 1873, on Grandfather Taylor's plantation, and was too young remember moving to Columbia. I entered school at the age of seven and began selling newspapers on the street about that time. This ultimately developed into carrying a route; that is, delivering papers to subscribers. This service, however, did not interfere with my school work. I loved to study and soon learned how many bushels of unshucked corn were in a crib 10 feet wide, 16 feet long, and 11 feet high.
"During vacation, I took the chance offered me by the foreman of the Columbia Yeoman to work in the composing room. Charles M. McJunkin had established the Yeoman as an afternoon newspaper, and he was its editor and publisher. I had not worked in that office long before the foreman called me over to where he had just lifted a galley of wet type on the stone and asked me if I had ever seen 'printers lice.' I told him I had not. 'Well' he said, 'you will have to learn about them before you qualify for the role of a printer's devil.'
"Then he pulled the wet column of type apart, from about the middle of the galley and told me to look close. As I bent my head down to look, he shoved the wet type together, and the water spattered in my face. The foreman laughed heartily. He explained to me that type lice was a myth, there being no such insect. All printers, he said, had been through the initiation. He explained that printers' quads were quadrats, but the word had been shortened by the printing trade to quad.
"The M quad, the foreman said, was the first piece of type metal used in printing at the beginning of a paragraph. The quad is just half as wide as the M, and it is used mostly for wide spacing in print. The galley is a brass tray for holding a wet column of type. In the hand type setting days, a page of type was washed with lye, and the ink was scrubbed off with a brush. Afterwards, it was rinsed with water and lifted on to an imposing stone, from which it was stories each day.
"These things might appear to a non-printer as of little moment, but any printer knows they are essentials to the trade. As a matter of fact, there are a thousand and one little and big things in the vocation of printing that must be known by one who follows the business. Indeed, the printing business is like the university. One may graduate, but if he succeeds in any undertaking, he must learn something new every day about it. At least, that has been my experience. I worked about four months for the Yeoman that summer and then returned to school in the fall. The novice in all composing rooms was called the devil, when I began the trade, and that phrase is still in vogue for be- ginners. It means he is being initiated in printing, and it is never applied to a lad as a reproach. I became somewhat acquainted with the printing business in the Yeoman office. But when another vacation came around, Horatio Melton Emlyn had established the Columbia Record as an afternoon newspaper, and I was invited to work there as a printer's apprentice.
"I accepted the offer and remained there until I became what was then known as a journeyman printer. That label is used today. Generally speaking, a journeyman printer is a workman, while a merchant printer is the owner of a printing shop. Most job printing shops in the United states are owned and managed by a merchant printer. He may employ one printer or a hundred printers to work there. I once worked in a job office in New York where 137 printers were on the pay roll.
"From 1885 to 1893, when the linotype made its advent into the printing industry, the printers throughout the United States were a migratory group. The roving habit perhaps was due to the fact that a printer could 'catch on' to a job almost anywhere, and then, too, the young men who were 'foot-loose' of a family were generally keen to see the world and to get experience in the bargain. Hence, many of them became 'here today and gone tomorrow,' so to speak. Today that sort of soldier-of-fortune system appeals to some.
"Probably association contacts had something to do with it, but my feet began to itch for new pastures, and a new daily made its bow to the public at Charleston, South Carolina, in 1889. It was called the Charleston World, and I went to Charleston expecting to work on the new morning paper. When I arrived there, however, I discovered that the World had labor troubles, and I got a job on the old daily, the News and Courier. I worked for the News and Courier about two years, and I have always found a warm welcome from the News and Courier printers when I have visited Charleston.
"The printers' group has always had a fraternal system all its own, and no journeyman printer is a stranger very long in any printing plant in the United States, if he demonstrates he can talk the printers language. One day in Charleston, I learned from roving printers that the Savannah Morning News needed type stickers. My disposition was to go, although I had plenty of work at Charleston. I did go, and I did get a 'trick,' which is printers' lingo for a job, on the News.
" I became fond of Savannah's people and climate and was pleased with my job, but, after I had been there about eighteen months, a traveling printer told me nobody ever became a real, first class printer until he had worked for a time on New York newspapers. I thought it over that night, and the upshot of it was that I went to New York to try my hand. There were then, 1889-1891, the New York World, the New York Herald and the New York Tribune, and many lesser newspapers running the gauntlet there. Joseph Pulitzer, of the World, James Gordon Bennett, of the Herald, and Horace Greeley, of the Tribune, were about as well known to New York printers and the public as was New York itself.
" I went to work on the New York World, and there were no dull moments. Something exciting was going on all the time, although the composing room was functioning along routine line. I knew Joseph Pulitzer was a famous editor and a daring publisher before I went to New York. I saw him in action when I worked there. The other two, editors of the Herald and of the Tribune, were very widely known, and printers there had their favorites. Mr. Pulitzer was a decided martinet in all departments of the World, particularly in the editorial rooms. He would visit with printers often when he was at home.
"When Mr. Pulitzer was absent from the city, he made it a point to have the World mailed to him seven days a week. If anything he read in any department of the paper was dull, he sent a very pointed, sharp reprimand to the head of that department! or, if he was highly displeased, he hurried home to settle it. He came home when not expected one time, highly diapleased at the editorials. There were four or five associates editors, and Colonel John A. Cockerill was head of the staff, in Mr. Pulitzer's absence.
"Mr. Pulitzer got off his yacht, took a cab and came directly to Cockerill's office. ' What in h--1 has happened, Cockerill? he began. Hurrying on before Colonel Cockerill could answer, he said, 'The editorial page is full of dead matter, no life in it, and most of the editorials are about dead issues. Colonel Cockerill was a man of metal, and he explained that the editorials were not very brilliant, but they were the best he could get from the staff at hand. 'What do you mean,' thundered Mr. Pulitzer, naming two editors that Mr. Cockerill had fired for drunkenness. 'What's happened to them?' 'They were fired,' said Colonel Cockerill, 'for drunkenness.' 'Well, now you are fired,' returned Pulitzer. Then he told one of the other associate editors to go out and rehire the discharged men, saying: 'If it takes drunks to put some life in an editorial, then I'm in the market for drunks!'
" When the two man who had been discharged were found on the street and literally grabbed and hired, they were shaking in the brisk atmospers then prevailing, each unable to find enough cash to buy a drink of Whiskey. They borrowed a dollar from the man who hired then, and all of then had a 'shot' of liquor as they returned to resume work on the editorial staff of the New York World. All these 'goings on' were known in the composing room of the World, quite as soon as elsewhere.
" Colonel Cockerill was prominent in New York as a correspondent at Albany and at Washington, and he had won the friendship of Mr. Collis P. Huntington, a multi-millionaire industrialist. It was not long until Mr. Huntington bought a complete newspaper plant and turned it over to John A. Cockerill, who became editor and publisher of the New York Commercial Advertiser. Perhaps it is un- necessary to say that Colonel Cockerill never overlooked a chance to annoy the New York World. He put plenty of life in his editorials, and the Commercial Advertiser's subscription list grew like Jonah's gourd vine for a time. It soon began paying out $500 for any man or woman who was accidentally killed, with a copy of the Commercial Advertiser in his or her pocket. This news was discussed in the composing room as fully as it was in the editorial department.
" The Commercial Advertiser boosted its street sales and subscription lists by its insurance plan, but, in a few months, the death payments scheme was voided by the courts on the ever, the Commercial ground that it injured private insurance companies. How- Advertiser kept up its campaign on the world. At that time, the New York World building, with its golden dome, was about the only sky-scrapper in New York. The dome was about as well known there as the World.
" One morning the Commercial Advertiser had several little boxed notices reading: 'Look at the dome tonight at 10 o'clock.' The whole square was packed with men and women that night, and we looked at the dome as 10 o'clock struck. At that moment this notice was flashed on the dome: 'For news that is dependable, and editorials that are fair and warmer, read the New York Commercial advertiser! ' The big audience saw the joke instantly and proceeded to laugh at it.
"It might be said that the competitive animus between rival newspapers in 1889-1895 was far more spirited than it is today. They nagged each other. It was while I was on duty in the composing room of the New York World that I heard the following jokes about the editors of the Herald and the Tribune. I never saw Mr. Bennett. He was absent, the boys told me, when I was visiting printers there. In 1892, the "world and Tribune reduced the price of the papers on the street from 5 cents to 2 cents. The Herald management couldn't reduce its price without gaining Mr. Bennett's consent, and he was in Paris. They sent him a cablegram, and he wired back: 'Reduce and advertise it everywhere.'
"The Herald, late with its announcement of a cut in price, sent out crews to advertise it. One sign was painted on the street side of the concrete fence at Fort Thomas. The War Department raised a storm about it, and the Herald sent a crew to remove the objectionable notice on United States property. They couldn't rub it off, and they took a chisel and hammer and cut it out. That scar yet carries the notice that the New York Herald has cut its price from 5 cents to 2 cents.
" One day a printer on the Tribune got a note from Mr. Greeley. Try as he might, he couldn't read it, and finally he took it to Mr. Greeley and asked him to read it. Mr. Greeley did so and smiled, as he said: 'The editor says you are hereby fired.' The printer took the note and went to another office and applied for work. ' We can use you, if you have recommendations,' said the foreman. ' Sure ' said the applicant, 'I have been working on the New York Tribune and here is my recommendations,' handing the boas the Greeley note. Glancing at it, but not reading it, the printer boss put the note in his pocket and said cheer fully: 'All right, you may go to work! ' The printer who carried that note as a recommendation was wondering when he told me about it what might happen to him if the new boss should ever be able to read Mr. Greeley's note.
" I was present at the first demnostration of the linotype machine in New York in 1892. It made such a record at that exhibit that the three big news-papers, the World, Tribune and Herald bought upwards of 100 machines. That sale assured the manufacturing company of sufficient funds to succeed over the primary hurdle. By 1893, the linotype began to enter offices of newspapers all over the United States. Many other machines have appeared since, but the linotype has proved superior to them in setting straight matter, that is, type for the average newspaper. Great batteries of linotype machines now may be seen in most newspaper offices of the nation.
" After some experience on the linotype keyboard, and care of the machine, in New York, many printers there decided the machine had ditched them in the printing business and were looking about for new vocations. I was one of those, and I decided to come back to my home town of Columbia. However, when I arrived home, the sentiment was beginning to change about the machine making less work for printers. It appeared to be making more business, and men ware in demand to handle the increased business. That fact ultimately proved true, and it resulted in my staying in the printing industry. And I have been lucky enough to become a veteran printer and to find plenty of work right here in Columbia, where I spent my childhood years.
" In 1904, I was working in a job office in Columbia. Miss Essie Muller was also working as a cashier in that office, and we met in a business way there. I talked with Miss Muller at the noon hour pretty often, and we became good friends in a few weeks. I had admired her during those talks and kept wondering if she could ever care for a guy like me. Sometimes we walked a part of the way home together. One day I would think I was making progress, and maybe the next day I would decide I wasn't. But I had become so deeply in love with Miss Muller that I kept on making offers to escort her home or to the theater.
"My persistency finally won the day, and we were married that year by the Reverend C. A. Freed, then pastor of Ebenezer Lutheran Church. We still are members of Ebenezer Church. We live in our own home at 119 Walker Street, Columbia, and have been happy over the years since we married. We have never enjoyed great wealth, but we have enjoyed a comfortable living, as I have had steady work in the printing trade practically all the time since 1904. When I married I quit roving. I become a member of the composing room of the Columbia Record soon after Mr. R. C. Wright became its editor and publisher in 1912. When he sold the newspaper in 1929, I was still there, and I am still there today (1938). We now have a linotype scale known in the printing trade as piece-work; that is, one gets paid for the number of M's he makes during the working period.
" I am not the speediest typesetter on the Record battery of linotypes, but I can make a sufficient string on my machine to earn an average of $10.00 between working hours, 8 a. m. to 4 p. m., with a half hour's pause at noon for lunch. I am glad that I have been able to Serve the public in this way. I have set the type for books and for editorials, which may be read in after years, and this thought pleases me.
" The Wood family, at least my immediate part of it, is a bland, good-natured type of people. We have not been prone to hide from the sheriff, and we have tried our best to make an honest living. This is the way I wish to lead up to my late brother. He was not a printer, but he lived and died (1937) in Columbia. Most Columbians mistook one of us for the other almost as often as they did the two Dromios of William Shakespeare, in the Comedy of Erros.
" I was working regularly at the Columbia Record, when it was then a 7-day newspaper, and I was off duty on a Wednesday. The following Thursday another Record printer saw my brother on the street and asked him why he was loafing on Thursday, after being off duty on Wednesday. 'I'm off the Record for good,' said my brother, 'I don't care if I never go to the Record office again.' The printer hurried to the Record to tell about it, and while he was telling the story, he caught eight of me at work. The composing room had a big laugh over it.
" I evened the score with my brother soon after that, when his boss began to lecture me on the street one day, telling me he thought I was at work. 'I don't care,' I told him,' whether I come to work at your factory or not.' And he, too, ultimately found out he was talking to the wrong man, as he arrived at his place of business. These are two samples of mistaken identity that amused us for many years.
" And, in a manner of speaking, I think innocent jokes and all clean amusement make life a little more endurable. The thought comes to me that the dullest man I ever saw was the governor of a great state. And the brightest man I ever knew was a freckled face, red-headed tramp printer."