SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE	MAMIE BROWN, LIBRARIAN
Date of First Writing	January 11th, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Madaline Allan (colored)
Fictitious Name	Mamie Brown
Street Address	4 Norman Street
Place	Charleston, S.C.
Occupation	School Teacher
Name of writer	Muriel A. Mann
Name of Reviser	Office Charleston
Project 1655
Muriel A. Mann,
Charleston, S.C.
No. of words 2100
LIFE HISTORY
MAMIE BROWN, LIBRARIAN
It was a bright sunny morning out of doors. The city was basking in a warm mid-winter sun, but inside the little brown house on Robson Street there was gloom and despair. It was the home of Mamie Brown, and Mamie had despair. It was the home of Mamie Brown, and Mamie had lost her job.
You would never guess, judging from her appearance, that she is a woman of considerable talent and education, a capable school teacher, librarian, seamstress and mother. But she is all of these, and more.
Mamie is taller than the average woman and inclined to plumpness. She has this lips, a broad nose, coffee colored skin and straight, wiry hair - a true negro type. She dresses neatly and in good taste.
Mamie was born on Smith Street forty years ago. Her father was a brickmason and her mother was a seamstress. Her father was a brickmason and her mother was a seamstress. They had worked and saved, and in 1903, when Mamie was four years old, they were able to buy the home on Robson Street in which they still live and which they share with the widowed Mamie and her two daughters. It is a two-storied frame house painted brown, and is the most substantial one on the street - a short throughfare off the highway near the edge of the city.
There are no trees or flower gardens on this unpaved street that borders the section of the city known as Fiddlers Green, a section which ends in the marshes of the Ashley River nearby. The square plot by the side of the house, which might have been a garden, is paved with cement. A roof has been erected over it to provide shelter for an automobile. This was during better times. In true Southern style broad porches follow the L shape of the house, the lower floor of which is occupied by Mamie, while her parents live on the upper story.
Mamie's father, Samuel, was seventy years old on Thanksgiving Day. He is slight and erect and wears his years lightly. He is still able to do an occasional days work. His wife, Henrietta, has long since given up sewing. Their chief concern is the welfare of Mamie and her family, and keeping the taxes paid on the home, now that Mamie is no longer able to pay any rent.
When Mamie was a child she attended the public schools, Simonton and Burke, respectively, and completed the fifth grade. She went from there to the Avery Institute, a junior college, where she finished the Normal Course. After receiving her diploma she obtained a position teaching school. She gave up teaching when she got married. That was in 1924. Her husband, William, had a good position as assistant cashier at the Mutual Bank and was able to provide for his wife. After they were married they continued to live in her parents' home.
The family circle was complete when Mamie became the mother of two daughters, born five years apart. It was a united and happy little group. They were able to study and enjoy the things they liked best: radio programs, and reading. Mamie loved to do fine hand work in her spare time, especially in the evenings, with her family grouped about her. She and her husband read the classics, Dickens, Scott, Thackeray, while her nimble fingers worked swiftly on delicate fabrics or crocheted many useful articles. Samples of Mamie's afghans, bedspreads and hemstitching have been shown on many occasions, and her work was in great demand for church bazaars at one time. Their lives seemed to be quite complete. They were, above the average intellectually, and they were very ambitious for their daughters.
The rooms occupied by Mamie are quite comfortably furnished, with rugs, curtains and furniture of better taste than is usual in the homes of the colored people. There is a piano in the parlor, a radio in the dining- room, and the apartment is heated by a large circulating oil-burning heater. There are built-in bookcases filled with books, many books. One of these in the dining-room contains a complete set of Funk and Wagnall's Standard Encyclopedia. A goldfish bowl stands in the corner near a window, filled with minute tropical fish. The house is lighted with electricity and equipped with modern plumbing. Everything looks well cared for.
But this kind of life was destined to end. Four years ago, in 1935, Mamie's husband, William, died of Brights Disease, following a lingering illness, and Mamie had to read just her life to the new circumstances. At the time, Ethel, the older daughter, was eight years old, and her sister Viola, was three. Since then it has been rough travelling for Mamie and her aging parents.
The first thing that Mamie did after realining that it would be necessary for her to support her family, was to have her teacher's certificate renewed. She applied for a position in one of the city schools, but unfortunately, in such a crowded field her chances were not so good, and Mamie was unable to find a place.
It was discouraging, but she kept on trying, without results. Then she applied to the W P A and was fortunate enough, after being certified for relief, to be given work in a library in one of the largest colored schools in the city. Nothing could have suited her better, for it give her an opportunity to use her imagination, and she did outstanding work.
It was not long before Mamie made the library live because of the intense interest which she took in her work. Her posters were artistic and unusually interesting, and her book reviews were worded in excellent English, showing real thought and much research. While there were a great many books in the library of this school, they had never been organized or classified, and it was entirely through Mamie's hard work that the library became an outstanding unit of the school.
Mamie held story-telling hours and soon the children were flocking to the library to hear her stories, for Mamie had the knack of making her characters live. And more and more the library was used for research work, for the pupils soon found out that she was a storehouse of information, and never failed to give whatever help was needed.
It was only natural that soon, she was raised from the intermediate to the skilled rating, and the school board promised that, when the WPA program ended, Mamie would continue to be employed by the institution.
The outlook was bright indeed, and Mamie was very happy and contented in her work. Ethel and Viola, now twelve and seven years of age, respectively, were doing well in school. Ethel was finishing the eight grade and had been on the honor roll every month. She was planning, definitely, to become one of three things, a nurse, a pharmacist or a doctor, but her desire to become a doctor was strongest. With careful planning it was possible, on Mamie's pay to make ends meet and to even pay her parents rent to help out with the taxes, Mamie was planning for the future.
Mamie was not prepared for the blow when it fell. Without warning, she was released from the WPA, and her beloved library work was over. A new ruling was made releasing all women over sixty-five years of age, or with children under sixteen years of age, from the WPA rolls. These women were eligible for Social Security benefits.
Mamie's case was investigated after she had made her application for the benefits, but she was notified, that, as she was a healthy woman able to work, she was not entitled to Social Security. In any case, the state was not prepared to take on this extra burden, she was told. So Mamie's spirits were very low. There was some consolation in a letter received from the welfare Department stating that they were going to reinvestigate her case, but meanwhile something had to be done, for Mamie had not been able to save anything, and it was imperative that she find work immediately.
Again, faced with the problem of providing for her family, she renewed her efforts to get a teacher's position, and did succeed in finding a small job teaching, arts and crafts from 3.30 until 7 o'clock every afternoon in one of the schools. But the pay was so small that she was unable to provide sufficient food for herself and the children, much less help her father with the taxes, as she had been doing.
Perhaps the most difficult thing for Mamie to understand was that another library worker was put in her place by the WPA, thus killing her chance of being taken on by the school board. As long as they could get a librarian paid by the government, they would not employ anyone. The thought of another carrying on the work which she had begun was hard to bear.
It was with tears in her eyes that Mamie told of her fear that her children were getting an "inferiority complex" because of the conditions under which they now have to live. And she believes this too. The strain is telling on her visably.
Fortunately the health of the family has been good, but it is not possible to have a balanced diet, heat in the house, or clothing on the fifty cents a day that Mamie is now earning. She cannot even buy the materials necessary to complete some of her partly finished handwork and crochet pieces, she hopes to sell. And she is disheartened by the knowledge that, when the schools close at the end of the summer term, her pay will cease.
There is very little that the children can do to assist. Every Sunday, Ethel, the older daughter, earns twenty fives cents for playing the hymns at the Sunday School, but she is still too young to earn enough to really help, and Mamie has begun to believe that her chances to study to become either a nurse, a pharmacist or a doctor are very slim. Viola has not made any plans for the future as she is only in the second grade in school. She is too young to realize what has happened, and she does not know why her mother weeps so much and is so filled with sorrow.
But there is a bright side to Mamie's trouble. If she can hold on a while longer, she may be given a permanent position teaching again in one of the public schools, she believes.
She is still trying to find the solution to her problems and live up to her ideas of a good life," to be an active member of the church and of some service to the community, she says: I want to have a family life that will be an example to other"."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	THE HARDY FAMILY.
Date of First Writing	March 7th, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Roe Remington (White)
Fictitious Name	Mrs. Hardy
Street Address	Windermere
Place	Charleston, S. C.
Occupation	Housewife
Name of writer	Muriel A. Mann
Name of Reviser	State Office.
THE HARDY FAMILY.
Facing the highway, just outside an old southern city, stands an attractive modern ivy-colored brick house of English design, with an expanse of well cared for lawn in front and a lily pond and flower garden in the rear. An electrically lighted sign which reads "The Winder - Guests", stands prominently at the entrance to the driveway, advertising to passing motorists that they may find accommodations within. It is the home of Dr. and Mrs. Hardy, who, more by chance than any other reason, find themselves with a thriving tourist business.
Mrs. Hardy, a good-looking woman with a shock of dark bobbed hair, shot with gray, and snapping brown eyes, was seated in the comfortable living room telling how she happened to convert her home into a tourist's inn.
"About two years ago," she said, "the house began to feel lonely and altogether too large for two people. Our three boys, Jack, Dick, and Paul were in the north seeking their own careers, and Phyllis, our only daughter had just gotten married. We were hard pressed financially, and for the first time in my life I seemed to have time on my hands. I was seeking some new interest, something which would pay.
One day, the thought occurred to me that a number of homes along the highway were displaying tourist signs, and perhaps I too, could rent my three bedrooms occasionally and pick up a few extra dollars. So I talked it over with my husband, and as the idea met with his approval, I prepared to carry out the plan.
"From the beginning the venture was a success, and scarcely a night passed that the three bedrooms were not occupied, and, although my rates were reasonable, my bank account grew steadily, and I was thoroughly enjoying my contacts with the traveling public. It was a pleasant surprise to me.
"Only one unpleasant incident occurred. That was when one of my neighbors resented the competition so much that she employed a little colored boy to stand out in front of our house and direct all inquirers to her home. But, when the matter was brought to the attention of the county sheriff, the boy was ordered away and we were declared to be within our rights. We have not been bothered with her since.
"It was about a year after I began to rent my rooms that I happened to hear that someone was thinking of buying the vacant lot next door for the purpose of building a tourist camp. This was not a particularly agreeable thought to us, so we decided to buy it ourselves and build another house - a house which could be used to accommodate tourists now and later turned into a home for one of the children should any of them want to return here to live. Anyway it seemed like a good investment, and if I could keep three bedrooms steadily occupied, why not more!
Mrs. Hardy got up and let in Trixy, the family pet, a little brown terrier who had been standing patiently outside the screen door for some time. Then resuming her seat, went on with her story:
"We didn't lose any time in calling in an architect and before long the plans were drawn up, the contract signed and the building under way.
"It was completed a short time ago, giving me seven more rooms to rent. Last night every room was taken and there were twenty-two people in the ten rooms. But that is almost a nightly occurance, and I am making so much money that before long it will be possible for my husband to give up his teaching and research work at the Medical College and retire.
The new house, which stands to the side and slightly to the rear of the brick house, is Colonial in style and painted grey with deep blue shutter. The lawn has been extended across the front, and at the foot of the iron-railed steps by which you enter, a semi-circle of spring flowers will soon be a riot of color in shades of yellow and blue.
Mrs. Hardy invited me to inspect the interior, and accompanied by Trixy, we strolled across the lawn.
"I paid cash for every piece of furniture here, and expect to have the house paid for within three years at the rate I am going," she informed me. "I have tried to think always of the comfort of my guests and have bought the best springs and mattresses obtainable because I know from experience how much a comfortable night means after a day on the road."
A servant was polishing the oak floors and putting everything in order. The rooms are attractively furnished, and well designed to please the comfort loving guest.
There is a roomy two-car garage provided for each house and ample parking space, nicely graveled, which will accommodate a number of extra cars.
Strains of a Bach Prelude were coming from the little apartment over the brick house garage which is now occupied by Phillis and her husband, who have recently returned home to live. Phillis is an accomplished musician.
No detail seems to have been overlooked. There is even a laundry room where all the linens are washed and ironed, and there is enough work to keep a laundress employed constantly as well as a man and two maids.
Seated again in the living room, Mrs. Hardy resumed her story.
"A short time ago a woman died here. She was on her way to Florida accompanied by a companion, and had just stopped for the night. I chatted with her for a few minutes before she retired, and she seemed to be in good health and the very best of spirits. Early in the morning I heard a commotion downstairs, but thought nothing of it until my husband came in and told me that she had died in her sleep.
"Happening in our home, there was no undue excitement, as the doctor is naturally familiar with the procedure in such matters. The coroner was called and the body removed early. There was nothing more that anyone could do. But you have to be prepared for anything which occurs in this business.
"Occasionally an old college classmate of our stops by, giving us an opportunity to renew old friendships and memories, and we both like the tourist business so much that it looks now like a permanent thing.
"But times have not always been so easy or so prosperous for us," Mrs. Hardy went on. "Indeed there have been periods when the struggle for existence was far from an easy one.
"The doctor and I met when we were attending the University of Iowa from which we graduated, he in chemistry and I in the arts' course. He obtained a position teaching chemistry at the University of North Dakota and I went to Boston to study at the Curry School of Expression. The course took three years, and after graduating I taught for three years at Smith College before we got married.
"We were married at my home in Minneapolis and moved to Fargo to live, and for twenty years it was a struggle to raise four children on a teacher's salary, even though I kept up my teaching and was a pioneer in the school of expression in that state.
"Our children were fairly well grown when my husband decided to go after his Ph. D. degree. He began by studying during the summer holidays towards that end. But it was very hard on him and the progress was slow in comparison, so I insisted that he resign his teaching position and devote an entire year to the work demanded for his degree, which he did, and during that time I supported the entire family with my teaching.
"It was a difficult year for the Hardy family, and it meant making many sacrifices, but we persevered, and in the end the reward was well worth the work and time it had taken, for my husband was offered a position here at the Medical College as head of the Department of Food Research, the field in which he had specialized, which meant making a new start in a new field. Not long ago he was awarded an honorary degree by one of the important colleges of the south for his discoveries in the field of research, and I feel justly proud of him.
"Ten years have passed since coming south, ten years of ups and downs, of toil and heartaches as well as success, for it was shortly after we moved here and had bought this home, that the great depression hit the country, and for eight months not a professor at the college received a cent of pay.
"So once again I took up teaching and was able to make enough to help us over this bad time. We joined the Rotary Club and other groups and made contacts in this way. It was very discouraging at times, but we kept right on, and everything had gradually worked out as it usually does.
"Jack attended the local college the first two years we lived here and then he decided that he wanted to study chemistry in the north and graduate from a northern university. But the outlook was not very bright for we were unable to help him.
"He was undaunted, however, and packed his things, including his drums, and hitch-hiked to Ohio. When he was unable to get a job in an orchestra he washed dishes in a restaurant or waited on tables. The only trouble about being a waiter was that he had so much difficulty in remembering the orders, that sometimes the results were disastrous.
There was a gleam of pride in Mrs. Hardy's eyes as she told of her son's achievement.
"When Jack graduated he was offered an assistantship which he accepted, and after four years of teaching he won the Baker Fellowwhip Award of $1000.00 over competitors from every university in the country which enabled him to give up teaching and devote his time entirely to research. Now he is earning a fine salary working for the Mellon Institute, has married the girl of his choice, and is living in Dayton, Ohio.
"About five summers ago we decided that we all needed a rest, and a summer in the mountains away from the heat, would be beneficial, especially for my husband. Se ewe rented a cottage in the mountains for the summer. Dick was in college now and Phillis was preparing to go, too.
"It was really a rest and complete change, even though it took an awful lot of cooking to keep up with the appetites. But it paid in the end, I'm sure. Anyway, when Jack joined us, hitch-hiking down from Ohio, he brought with him a classmate and chum, Jim Ross, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Due to the to return to the university to get a teacher's diploma, rather than wait for something to turn up. None of the boys had any money to spare, but in spite of this we had a jolly time fishing, swimming in the mountain streams, hiking and loafing, and it was sonn apparent to everybody that Jim and Phillis were very much in love.
"When our vacation was over Phyllis went off to college for three years, and Jim found a position teaching architecture in Ohio. After Phyllis graduated she and Jim married and went to live in Ohio. Phyllis kept up her music and taught, and at the end of the first year they had saved enough to take a two month trip of Europe. They had a glorious time, returning happy but broke, of course, and went to live in Alabama, Jim having accepted a position teaching there to get away from the cold northern winters. They were living there when my husband happened to hear that there was a vacancy in a local firm of architects, so he sent for Jim, and that is why they are living here now. It looks like it will be permanent, too, and Jim is happy to be wotking in his own field instead of teaching. They are going to have a baby next summer and are so happy about it.
"Our other boys, Dick and Paul have done well too. Dick graduated with honors from the college here and won a scholarship to the University of New York. He is a biologist and has a good position in New York. Last summer he married Phyllis' college roommate, who is also a very fine musician, and she is continuing her studies at the Juilliard School of Music.
"Paul, our youngest, is at the Bryant College of Business in Providence, Rhode Island, and will finish in August. He is earning his own tuition by helping in the office and correcting English papers. For a time it was difficult for Paul to find himself. He was not happy at the college here, and after two years he decided to get a job. For eight months he worked at a wood preserving plant, and they liked him so well that he can have his job back any time he wants it. But a relative expects to find a place for him in New York when he graduates, so he will probably remain there.
Mrs. Hardy paused reflectively, and after a moment added: "Looking back over the busy years behind us. It is easy to understand why the house seemed lonely and why the demands upon our pocketbook have been so heavy, but little did we believe that we would end up in the tourist business and like it." papers. For a time it was difficult for Paul to find himself. He was not happy at the college here, and after two years he decided to get a job. For eight months he worked at a wood preserving plant, and they liked him so well that he can have his job back any time he wants it. But a relative expects to find a place for him in New York when he graduates, so he will probably remain there.
Mrs. Hardy paused reflectively, and after a moment added: "Looking back over the busy years behind us. It is easy to understand why the house seemed lonely and why the demands upon our pocketbook have been so heavy, but little did we believe that we would end up in the tourist business and like it."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT LIFE HISTORY
TITLE	WPA ROAD.
Date of First Writing	Jan. 31, 1939.
Name of Persons Interviewed	Charles Seabrook,
Arthur W. Bailey,
F. W. Johnston, (White)
Fictitious Names	(not necessary)
Place	Edisto Island, S. C.
Occupation	WPA Workers
Name of Writer	Chalmers S. Murray
Name of Reviser	State Office.
Project #-1655
Chalmers S. Murray
Edisto Island, S. C.
LIF HISTROY.
WPA ROAD.
In the days before highway building became a passion in South Carolina, a road rambled along the banks of Saint Pierre's Creek on the northwestern side of Etiwan Island, and came to a sudden stop at the gate that guarded the entrance to the Blue Cloud plantation grounds.
It was one of those informal roads. Often the roadbed was poorly defined. The trail seemed to lead off into the briar patch here and there, and its tributaries were nothing but footpaths. Sometimes shallow ponds left by summer rains, obliterated the wagon and cart tracks. When this happened vehicles must make a detour into the corn or cotton field, the driver trusting to luck that the wheels would not sink to the axles.
Fifteen years ago, the traveler would meet a few Negro pedestrians with loads on their heads, plodding along the side paths, and perhaps a cart or two, drawn by complaining oxen. Occasionally a shining black buggy would pass, the driver holding tightly to the reins, checking a high stopping sorrel horse.
The river was over to the right as one approached Blue Cloud. It showed itself between gaps in the pine woods - a winding slate-blue stream that flowed swiftly into Saint Helena Sound. Across the water could be seen three plantation dwellings, standing against a mass of greenery. At times the road came close to the high bank that fell abruptly off to the marsh grass field. As if frightened by too close contact with the creek, the road would twist itself nervously and take off into the pine barrens or the open fields.
It was about four and a half miles from the Etiwan public road to Blue Cloud plantation. Generally forty minutes were consumed in covering the distance by horse and buggy for sand and mud will slow down any horse. Bleak winds blew against the traveler in February and March. One arrived at his destination with numb feet and red stiff fingers. In summer the Saint Pierre's road was breathlessly hot for most of the time the trees haughtily kept their distance.
Near the plantation entrance was situated an old public landing once used by slave propelled boats. It was this landing that made possible the improvement of the road by the Federal government. The government cannot build a road to a private estate even though a number of families benefit thereby.
In February of 1938, the administrator who shapes WPA projects for Charleston county, upon request of certain Etiwan citizens, approved a plan to modernize the road leading to the public landing. It was to be one of those farm-to-market highways which enable the farmers to keep their produce moving by motor trucks. As the road stood nothing but the lightest vehicle could navigate the deep, boggy ruts. During rainy spells, even the Model Ts, found it hard going. Horse drawn vehicles had been outmoded. Beside the public landing was no earthly use unless it could be reached by a road that would stand up under the heavy summer traffic.
On March 17, 1938, actual construction work on the Saint Pierre's highway was started. The project was partially sponsored by a road commission of Charleston county which furnished the tools, and two motor trucks for hauling earth. The WPA pays for the labor. The county appointed the project superintendent. The foreman, the timekeeper, the truck drivers and the laborers were drawn from the WPA work relief rolls.
Almost a year after the work began, I drove from one end of the road to the other, and passed the greater part of one day talking with the foreman and the laborers. This is the story of what I saw and heard.
The men reported for work at eight o'clock sharp. Thirty-nine Negro laborers answered the roll call, their voices ringing out cheerfully in the frosty air. All of them had long handled shovels in their hands. They were variously dressed; some in overalls, some in coats and trousers held together in important places by brightly colored patches. The thermometer was hovering around 35, and many of the men were wearing two pair of trousers, old shabby pants covering the newer ones. Tin buckets and bottles of coffee were in evidence. There was not a sullen face in the group. The laborers all appeared to be in good health.
The superintendent, the foreman, the timekeeper and the truck drivers were white men. The foreman was a college man and an ex-army officer; the superintendent a small farmer, the timekeeper a mechanic out of a job; and the truck drivers, farm youths detached from the soil by adverse circumstances. None of them except the foreman had seen the inside of a college.
Most of the workers, white and black, rode to work in automobiles. A few who lived only several miles away walked; a handful rode horses. The Negroes paid on the average of twenty cents a day for their transportation in passenger cars or trucks. For them walking was out of the question. These who rode lived at the other end of the island, at least twelve miles from the job.
"I get up at six every morning," said the foreman. "of course, its pitch dlack dark then and I feed the animals by lantern light. I get my own breakfast. Its just too much to expect of my wife. She has plenty to keep her busy beside getting up in the cold dark."
The other workers had similar experiences. Some of them had to arise at five if they had wood to out, water to draw and cows to milk. Generally their wives fixed lunches for them the night before. "Too dark for fumble 'round with bittle 'fore day crask," one Negro remarked. "The old hen get for do that 'fore she fall sleep."
As soon as the timekeeper checked his rolls, the laborers were divided into two crews. One crew began leveling off humps on the roadbed and the other group was assigned to ditching. Soon the shovels were moving rhythmically with a steady purposeful swing. A large green truck drove up, the engine racing. Two men jumped to the ground, shovels in their hands. The loose yellow dirt started to move in a steady stream from the roadside to the truck's body.
The men were warming to their work. It would be a steady pull from now until twelve o'clock, noon.
The water boy came by with his bucket from which projected the handle of a tin dipper. He was a serious looking Negro youth of about 23, neatly dressed, and wearing dark glasses. The nearest well is three quarters of a mile distant. Until knock-off time the water boy will keep walking between the well and the place where the dirt is flying. Wielding shovels for hours at a stretch is dry work, even on a cold, dampish January day.
The youth with the dark glasses deals with two elements - water and fire. There are periods where everyone's thirst is quenched, and then the boy fills out his time by tending the fire, About eleven o'clock a small fire is kindles on the roadside, not for the purpose of warming hands and feet, but to heat the lunches. The buckets are placed in a ring around the coals, and the glass bottles full of coffee, in the center. By noon the lunches are piping hot. The water boy visits the fire once in a while to see that none of the buckets are burned or the bottles broken. He adds a twig or two when the flames die down.
The sound of soft singing is heard, coming from the place where the second truck is being loaded. The Negroes are singing so softly that the words do not register with the group of white men, even though the singers are only seven yards away. The Negroes might be filling in a grave so low and mournful is their song.
"I don't object to low singing at times," the superintendent says, "but this thing of one loud song after the other had to be stopped. It interfered with the work. Oh, it might help when they are pulling on a load - helps to keep them together. When we were moving logs on a CWA project several years ago they used to sing: 'I thought I hear the captain say, ho, ho, ho.' They would pull hard together at the word 'ho'. But they have got to remember that they come here to work - not to sing."
By this time the ditch diggers have heaped a big pile of earth along the edge of the road. Before long there will be several truck loads to move. This earth will be used for the fills. It is a good grade of soil, suited either for fills or top surfacing. "The government saved on this dirty," says the superintendent proudly. "We had to buy very little dirt outside."
The ditches are not dug "by air." Stakes placed at intervals along the road indicate the depth and the angle; line cord and surveyor's levels insure accuracy in excauvating and grading. The men evidently take real pride in the clean out, symmetrical ditches. Once in a while a Negro will step back and say: "Now, ain't that a pretty ditch?"
"Come on boys, come on boys," sings out the superintendent. The shovels move at a faster tempo. The foreman echoes the command: "Come on boys, throw it out." The sun goes under a cloud and the white men shiver. The Negroes do not seem to mind the bitting wind and the absence of sunshine. Their blood is pumping strongly through their veins. A few laborers are obviously sweating.
On Etiwan a great deal of criticism has been directed against the project. "It is a pure waste of money," says one man who now and then dabbles in the stock market. "The government will go broke building roads to every public landing."....." Their fathers hauled cotton and white potatoes over the road in carts. What's the need of a modern road? Let the farmers do what their fathers did. Old time methods are good enough," comments a retired farmer."... The Negroes spend their time leaning on their shovels, the foreman sitting on their shovels, the foreman sitting on their behinds," says a school teacher.
"All of that talk doesn't bother us too much," the superintendent declares. "we know that the road is needed and that the men put out real work. I would like to see any of those people who talk like that stay by this job eight hours a day in January or August. Cold winds in January, hot sun and mosquitoes in August and plenty of hard work all of the time. Yes, I would like to see them try it."
"Do the men knock off to rest now and then? I should say not. They don't knock off for any purpose except to eat lunch. They are supposed to take care of their bodily needs before they leave home. But I can tell you this - the work doesn't hurt them. They thrive on it."
"They are hardly ever sick," the foreman adds. "None of the laborers with us have lost more than five percent of the working hours on account of sickness during the ten months. As a matter of fact they cannot afford to be sick for more than five days in succession. If they are absent five days hand-running, they are automatically released from the project. That's the regulations."
The timekeeper looks at his watch, turns to the superintendent and announces: "Twelve o'clock."
The superintendent, a stockily built little man, draws himself up to his full height and shouts: "All right, boys. Knock off for lunch."
The men scramble out of the ditch, brushing the earth from their clothing. They are joined by the laborers who have been leveling the roadbed. All carry shovels on their shoulders. The thirty-nine Negroes walk toward the fire where their lunch awaits them. The white men assemble at a fire of their own. As a special treat the timekeeper has brought along a peck of oysters. The oysters will be roasted and eaten with cheese and sandwiches and coffee.
The Negroes open their quart buckets and begin eating without ceremony. Table spoons are stuck down into masses of hominy grits soaked with bacon grease, are pulled out with a quick motion, and then disappear into wide open mouths. There is much smacking of lips and licking of spoons. Some of the men have brought sweet potatoes, and they divide the tubas with their fellows. The coffee is now steaming hot. The men drink it direct from the bottles, scorning cups. Cups are for women and children and sick people. Those who didn't bring fried fish have butts meat cooked to a turn, or fat pork.
"You get for eat meat on the job or the bear going to get you," explains one of the Negroes.
When they talk about the bear getting you they mean that you will faint with hunger and exhaustion.
They laugh and joke as they eat, kidding the bachelor members of the crew about their scant lunches. They talk about the coming planting season, the revival to be held in the African Methodist Episcopal Church on Sunday, their ill neighbors, and trout fishing. They recall how a certain young man named "Boy Rat" used to gorge himself with sweet potatoes until he could hardly move when he has finished his lunch, and had finally been released from the project. "This ain't no place for trifling nigger," observes an oldish man.
Around the other fire there is also laughing and joking. The superintendent, the foreman, and the timekeeper have known each other all of their lives. Now they constitute an isolated little group, standing apart in one sense of the word, from the other white men of their class on the island. They know that their neighbors criticize them for taking relied work, and the three have grown closer together in recent years. But they can laugh and joke when they are on the WPA road, and forget for awhile the cutting remarks that are thrown in their direction. They say they don't mind the criticism much, but one can detect the bitterness in their voices.
In half an hour the men are back at work. Three and a half hours now before time to knock off for the day. The minutes pass slowly when lunch is behind them; the last hour is the longest, so the foreman says. There is no slacking of effort, however. The shovels move as rhythmically as before and none of the laborers pull on their watch strings.
The youngest of the crew is around 21. He is slight build, but his arms muscles stand out like heavy cord, and his shovel seems a toy in his hands. The oldest on the project is a man nearing sixty. His skin is pot black and shriveled; his form tough and wiry. He is said to be one of the best workers on the road - and the ugliest.
Several months ago the men over 65 were discharged since they were supposedly eligible for social security benefits. The superintendent says that if the truth is known they were really unfit for hard work. And one of them grumbled continually and spread dissatisfaction among the laborers. "The trifling ones are all weeded out now," the superintendent reports.
The white men have from two to three dependents, some of the Negroes as many as ten. All of them say that without this government work they could not hope to clothe and feed their families and pay doctor bills. Over and over again they have tried to get outside jobs, but there was no use, the foreman says. He for one has reached the conclusion that private industry has no jobs to offer men who have been down on their luck since the depression set in and who are getting along in years. "When a man reaches forty it is all over with him. Friends and politicians have made me promises but they were just talking, trying to let me down easy," the ex-army officer remarks.
During the ten and a half months that the road project has been on progress only one man has found outside employment. This was a young Negro, who quit recently to join a county road building gang.
About one third of the workers, including the white men, run small farms on the side. They say that there is little if any profit to this farming business, but it helps to provide them with vegetables and meat, and if they are lucky they can make taxes out of cotton sales. On the whole they break about even with their farming ventures from a cash standpoint. Thrown out of the WPA job, they could not make a decent living. A large stake is needed for successful truck farming. There is no money in planting a few acres of cotton. Thousands of dollars must be had to equip a modern, motorized farm.
Few of the Negroes who rent or own land plant cotton. An acre or so of peas and sweet potatoes is about all they can manage. No one can carry on a farm by working only on Saturdays and holidays. Some of the more industries raise hogs and chickens, and a small percentage own cows. Scant attention is paid to vegetables gardens; even watermelons are seldom planted. The men want to rest up a bit on non-work days, put on clean clothes and "take a walk out."
Jobs on the Etiwan plantations do not pay a living wage. One has to work from sunrise to sunset to earn 75 cents. Beside this is only seasonable employment, except in rare instances. Etiwan farmers, white and black say they cannot pay more with cotton bringing less than ten cents a pound and potatoes and cabbages a glut on the market.
During the time the project has been running, only one man has been discharged for cause. "He knew too much," the superintendent comments. "He thought he knew more about laying out a road than the head engineer. And although he was an able worker, he was always slacking. I just had to let him go. He had a bad influence on the men."
The superintendent says that the road is laid out by an engineer from the county road commission, and that the work is inspected at regular intervals. Every month the superintendent turns in a written report, telling how far the work has progressed, and giving the time required to complete certain stretches. He is provided with a level to check the grades and depths. The foreman has charge of part of the laborers. The timekeeper fills in a report at the end of each day and administers first aid to the men when necessary. In the event of serious accident, he is instructed to rush the wounded one to the nearest physician.
The project will be completed by the end of February, the superintendent predicts. The public landing is almost in sight. Of the four miles of new road, at least three miles have been finished and all of the grubbing has been done. The roadbed measures 28 feet from ditch to ditch, and 50 feet overall including the ditches. When the last shovel of dirt has been dug, the farmers en route and the people of Etiwan will have a durable, scientifically graded, top-surfaced highway that will hold up under heavy motor traffic.
The superintendent turns to the timekeeper and says: "This has sure been a cold day. I've been cold every minute. Wish I had my feet propped up in front of a roaring fire. How is the time going anyhow?" He looks at his watch. The timekeeper consults his. Ten minutes more yet.
The men in the ditch seem to be working like automatons. Lines of weariness are appearing on some of the older faces. The young men are apparently as fresh as they were eight hours ago.
The watch hands crawl slowly around and finally one points to four and the other to six.
The superintendent yells: "Time's up. Store your tools."
The men stop working, at least they ease down to a stop. Several keep their shovels going for another minute so they can out down little humps on the ditch edge. These are evidently the ones who take a professional pride in their jobs.
They march in a line to the big wooden box which stands under a small oak, and one by one put their shovels away. There is little talking. The automobiles and trucks are throwing out clouds of smelly blue smoke. One ancient looking truck refuses to start. A Negro is turning the crank as fast as his arm can work, and cursing under his breath.
In five minutes the road is bare of black laborers. Automobiles are disappearing around the sweeping bend that skirts the river bank. The white men stand around and talk for awhile, then the foreman says: "Good Lord, I've got to start toward home. Got wood to bring in and water to turn off. Look's like its going to freeze tonight."
Tomorrow he would be back on the road with the superintendent and the timekeeper and the rest of the gang. Maybe they will be breaking ice in the ditch and stamping their feet to start the blood circulating.
Tomorrow I would be seated at my typewriter, with a fire at my back, writing the story of the WPA road.
Approximately 2200 words.
SOUTH CAROLINA WORKERS' PROJECT
CHARLESTON, S. C.
LIFE HISTORY.
TITLE:	MRS. MARTIN, PUBLIC HEALTH NURSE.
Date of First Writing	10-Feb-39
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Walter W. Herbert (White)
Fictitious Name	Mrs. R. N. Martin
Street Address	14 College Street
Place	Charleston, S. C.
Occupation	Public Health Nurse
Name of writer	Muriel A. Mann
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #-1655
Muriel A. Mann
Charleston, S. C.
MRS. MARTIN, PUBLIC HEALTH NURSE.
It is a large, rambling old brick house, not far from the college buildings, in which Mrs. Martin and her family live. It is simply furnished, and has an air of continual activity about it.
Mrs. Martin greeted me cordially at the door, a friendly smile on her face. "Come in," she said. "You are just on time."
I followed her into the living-room, where, amid a collection of drawings and paintings on the floor, sat a tall young girl who jumped quickly to her feet as we entered.
"This is Edith, my eldest daughter," said Mrs. Martin. "She has been painting, as you can see. I gave her a box of oil paints for a Christmas present and she has spent every spare minute working with them since."
There were water colors, pen and ink sketches, figures done in charcoal, and oil paintings of landscapes. It was an interesting collection that showed versatility and originality of thought.
Edith is tall like her mother, with dancing warm brown eyes and bobbed hair. She has some of her mother's vivaciousness and charm, too. Edith prepared to gather up her things to leave the room, but, after being assured that she could remain, reseated herself on the floor, and went on with her painting, while, her mother, head nurse of the Public Health Centre, prepared to tell something about herself and her work.
Mrs. Martin, R. N., is tall and good-looking. She has snapping brown eyes, dark brown hair, worn parted on the side of her head and twisted into a loose knot at the nape of her neck, and an exhilarating air of vitality.
Before she could begin her story, I heard the sound of footsteps lightly treading down the stairs, and in a moment a little old lady, very spry in spite of her obviously advanced age, smilingly tripped, almost fairy-like, into the room and put her arms affectionately around Mrs. Martin.
"This is my great-aunt Lily who lives with us," she informed me. "She is eighty-seven years old and stone deaf. Her eyesight is failing too, and she cannot see you distinctly." Turning to her aunt she said: "Yes, dear, I have brought you a package. Here it is."
Mrs. Martin placed a small bundle of varicolored embroidery threads in her aunt's hands, who, satisfied, left the room.
Aunt Lily has a small income of her own, and when she was left alone in the world, elected to come and live with us, although others in the family were better able to look after her. But she is happy with us as you can see, and we like to have her," Mrs. Martin explained. Then she returned to her story.
"We moved to Charleston about twelve years ago from Newberry, after we had lost our house and almost everything we owned through a bank failure. We managed to save about two hundred dollars out of the wreck, enough to start over again. My husband, who is a university graduate, went into business here and for a few years did very well. He had a flourishing bicycle shop and we were able to get along and look after our five children comfortably."
"But this was not to last. Following a nervous breakdown he was sent to the veterans hospital in Columbia, and I tried to run the business. I had to give it up in the end, and a time came, when, for about three weeks, I was really desperate, realizing that I was faced with the task of supporting a sick husband and five children."
"But let me go back to my girlhood. When I finished high school, I wanted to become a nurse, so I went to the Magdalene Hospital in Chester, where I was born and lived, to study."
Mrs. Martin paused reflectively for a moment. "Do you know, my maiden name was Nancy Stephenson, and my family comes in a direct line from Robert Louis Stephenson? She asked, pride creeping into her voice. I cannot tell you more about it, but I know it is true because my family has the records. It may be of interest to you to know this, although I seldom speak of it to anybody."
"But to go on with my story. After my graduation I kept right on and took a post-graduate course in Columbia, South Carolina. From there I went to New York City and took another course at the Maternity Institute. That was during the World War.
"It was while in Columbia that I fell deeply in love with a young officer and we became engaged, shortly before he went overseas. He was killed at Bellieu Wood." There was a wistful expression in Mrs. Martin's eyes as she told me this.
Edith collected her paraphernalia and left for the college glee club practice. There was no fear of interruptions now. Mrs. Martin resumed her story.
"Later, after a swift courtship, I married Mr. Martin. I respect him and he has been a wonderful father to our children, and we have had a happy married life, but" - she paused, "I believe you can only love once."
"We have five children, four daughters and a son. Edith is a second-term freshman at the college. She will be twenty on her next birthday. Then my boy, Tom, eighteen, and a freshman at the Citadel. Frances, Mary and Jane, who are seventeen, fifteen and eleven years old, are the younger girls. Jane, the baby, is up stairs in bed with a cold, which I believe may be a touch of 'flu, so I am keepin her isolated, much to her resentment."
"But let me tell you about Tom. When he was graduated from high school last summer, he decided that he wanted to go to college, but, in order to do so, he had to earn the money. So he got a job delivering milk for one of the dairies. It was hard work with long hours but before the summer was over he had two hundred and fifty dollars in the bank. He is six feet three inches tall. I wish you could see him in his uniform," Mrs. Martin added proudly.
"Frances and Mary are in high school and Jane is still in the grade school. They are bright girls, chiefly interested in sports at this stage."
"When my husband was in the hospital and the situation was so desperate, I knew that I had to do something quickly. Fortunately I had nursing to turn to. It was in 1933, in the day of the FERA, before it was changed to the WPA, I applied for, and succeeded in getting, a place with the public health department, and went to work. I worked very hard, and when a change was made in the administration and all the other nurses were let out, I was kept on and put in charge of the newly organized department."
"Then in 1936 I heard that there was a vacancy in the City and County Health Department. I knew that if I could get it that it would be a permanent position and would take me off the WPA. So I applied, and to my surprise, got it. I really hated to give up my work on the WPA, and shall feel eternally grateful for the chance given to me through the New Deal. But I had to think of the future."
"There was a great deal of ill-feeling evident when I first went to work at the Health Centre, but I am glad to say that it has gradually faded out. The other nurses resented the fact that I, who am an outsider, should be put over them, and I can understand how they felt. I even went to the board and offered to resign in favor of someone else, but the board refused to listen to me. Anyway, today we are very proud to be able to claim the best organized and smoothest running health department in the state. There are twenty-eight nurses on the staff and twelve clerical workers, all of whom are under me."
"You would like me to tell you about a day in my life?"
"Very well. But first let me show you a letter which I received a few days ago. It will give you an idea of some of my experiences." Here it is, written in pencil:"
Dear Mrs. Martin today is two weeks I've been confined to bed very ill snow little Helen has had feaver since Saturday very high feaver all night if the nurse comes there today tell her to please be sure & come here to see about her for me.
Thanks
Helens Mother
"I went to this house which consisted of one large room - nothing more. It was almost bare. In a corner some sacking had been nailed to the rafters in order to give a slight amount of privacy to the bed and its occupants, for mother and daughter were in the same bed. I found that the neighbors had become so concerned about the condition of the family that they had taken up a collection to pay for the services of a doctor. So, of course, I could do little for them. I did, however, bathe and freshen them up as much as possible under the circumstances, and left a note for the doctor telling him what I had done. I had given temperature readings. The little girl's temperature was 103 degrees. If he had not been called I would have telephoned an ambulance and taken them to the hospital immediately, but public health nurses never interfere when a regular doctor has been called. The child has double pneumonia. It is a pathetic case, though only one of many."
"At nine o'clock every morning I am at my office. I spend an hour checking over reports and letters, and taking telephone calls. Then the doctor and I attend to these calls before visiting at least one, and often two or three, schools before lunch time, where we examine and test the children for various symtoms of disease, including eye-trouble; teeth, heart and lungs affections. Every child is weighed, and a card index is carefully kept of each case. After lunch I go to the hospital and work in the wards doing dressings until five o'clock. Often at night I attend classes, either teachers classes or first aid."
"Yes, my days are very fully occupied and I have little time to spend at home with my family. I was invited to conduct some night classes in first aid recently, but I did not feel that it would be right for me to take on any more work than I am doing now. My husband, after coming out of the hospital seemed to lose his grip for a time, but this passed. He has found a job working for the bridge company, and has also taken over Tom's milk route, so we are able to get along nicely once more, and I am getting a good salary."
"Would you like to hear what I did last September?" Mrs. Martin asked, "because I would like to tell you about it."
"I decided that I would like to take a post graduate course in Public Health Nursing at the Peabody College for Nurses in Nashville, Tennesee, so I asked for and was given a three months leave of absence. I felt very young as I started out alone very early on the morning of September 24th, and the ride through the country was thrilling. I felt as though I were on the verge of a glorious adventure, and, in a sense this was true, for I studied hard and made a new circle of friends. I took five subjects and passed them all. Let me show you my report card."
The subjects listed were: Fundamentals, Principles and Organization, Preventive Medicine, Recreational Rhyth, and Intro to St. of Sco. sc. After each subject the letter "P" was written. It was truly an impressive report card.
"While at Peabody, ten of us formed a club which we called the RX Club, and we had a lot of fun in our spare time. There were midnight suppers and picnics. We were all young together. Before parting for our various homes at Christmas time, we agreed to write to each other every Birthday and Christmas".
"I think it is a good thing to get away from your family occasionally, because it does make them appreciate you more. I find the problem of four grown daughters in this modern world is a real one. That is why I am attending these night classes and studying psychology, hoping to find the answers to the many questions and problems which arise daily - so that I will be able to understand my girls better. I am attending a class this evening which begins at eight o'clock.
It was growing late. Edith had returned from her glee club practice, and the other girls were home too, so I took my leave. Mrs. Martin, was preparing for her evening class as I slipped out of the house.