Frances L. Harris
GREEKS IN WILMINGTON
Of the forty foreign-born and the forty native Greeks in New Hanover County forty-eight live in Wilmington, all of the foreign-born and eight native. These Greeks are loyal to the Greek Orthodox Church, although they have no church building nor a resident priest. When they have their occasional services they bring the priest from Raleigh. He also comes to them for weddings, baptisms, and funerals. There are now being made efforts to organize a congregation, and when this is done they will select their "President."
The Greeks feel much more securely married if a Greek priest performs the ceremony. They do not interfere with the religion of an American wife and will allow her to bring up her children in her faith, as far as attending Sunday School and church services are concerned; but the sacraments of baptism, marriage, and other ceremonies must be in charge of a Greek priest. Without exception they express amazement and disapproval of the American divorce habit. They practice careful training and instruction for matrimony, making of marital ties a serious partnership and life work.
In the fifty years that Greeks have been coming to Wilmington there is a record of one trial of a Greek in the courts for an illegal act, and that was proved to be ignorance. This is the story: Angelo Zandistis operated a cafe there.
His wife was a maternity case at a hospital in Wilmington. When time came for her dismissal Angelo gave a check in payment of her hospital bill. In his excitement he forgot to be sure that he had funds sufficient in the bank to cover the amount of the check. When the check was presented and the hospital was informed that it was no good they immediately had Angelo arrested. The other Greeks in the community came to his rescue by paying the check. The situation was explained and the case disposed of out of court. Angelo is quite successful now, carefully observing the law and operating his business under an Anglicized name.
All children attend the public schools and are generally good students, but the colony maintains a Greek school to which most of the Greek children anda good many adults go during hours which do not conflict with the regular school work. This school is for males only and is conducted by a young Greek who attended the University of Athens and New York University. He holds no degree but is read in both the Greek and English languages.
An outstanding characteristic of the Greeks in Wilmington is their generosity, a generosity prompted by sympathy for those in need. This generosity does not only extend to theirown people but to the other people of their community as well.
A conspicuous example of this generosity is found in the will of Mr. T. Pappademos, and in the report of the Associated Charities of Wilmington, North Carolina, for the year 1916. Quoting from the report: "The gift of $500.00 by the late Mr. T. Pappademos to this Board, deserves more than passing attention. Those who knew the donor intimately, speak most highly of his kindness to those in want, and that the deserving never went away hungry from his place of business. His gifts to individuals and to the James Walker Memorial Hospital give further evidence of his sympathetic heart to the sick and distressed. If the example of Mr. Pappademos, not native born, but who adopted this country as his own, would be followed by some of our own people of means, larger and better things for most of the applicants could be accomplished by this Board. May the Lord move the hearts of some to emulate the above example."
At this time, the New York Cafe, owned and run by the Saffo family, principally George Saffo, give to the Associated Charities one meal a day. This means 365 meals per year. If a client needs food for several days or a week his three meals are given and the number deducted from the aggregate. It is said that all the Greek restaurateurs in Wilmington are equally generous with individuals, but no record is kept of their kindness.
Frances L. Harriss
Nick Poulas, Anglicized name of Nicholas Katsikopoulas, was born in Athens, Greece, March 15, 1895. His father was an employee, of a gas factory and was able to only give Nick a grammar school education. When Nick finished this at the age of fifteen he started to work as a cook on a steamship, and for years he continued this work, traveling to most of the important seaports in the world. When the World War started he volunteered for service in the Greek Navy and there remained until the war ended.
He then went back to his work as cook on one of the Greek vessels, and on one of the trips he came to New York.
Nick had brothers in New York and was so delighted with everything he saw and heard of America that he decided to leave the ship. He secured, almost immediately, a job as a cook in a Brooklyn restaurant.
At that time he could only speak a few words of English, so he went to night school for three months and learned enough English so that he felt at home. He kept that job there for two years then he secured another job which he held for eleven years.
In 1932 one of Nick's cousins invited him to come to Wilmington and accept a job as cook in his cafe at much higher wages. He came and worked for his cousin about a year, then he took over the management of the Boston Cafe which he has operated since with the aid of a partner, John Paris. They live together in quarters located over the cafe. They also employ three extra people, a Greek and two American waitresses.
Nick has been successful in business. He owns a house and lot in New York City and a lot at Carolina Beach. He was naturalized while in New York, but he has never married. He says that there are more jobs, more money, and a much easier life in every way in this country.
GREEK STUDY
Subject: -Zacharias Mavrikis Jack Morris.
Writers: - Mrs. George Peschau Frances L. Harriss
Editor: - Edwin Massengill
Frances L. Harriss
Dr. George Patterson, the most famous Greek ever to reside in Wilmington, was born in this country in 1828 of a Greek father and an American mother. His father, George Pappatharakies, adopted his wife's name, Patterson, for himself and son.
Dr. Patterson, or Father Patterson as he was known to hundreds, was a scholar and very popular with all classes of people in Wilmington. He was equally at home in the mansions of the wealthy or the cottages of the poor. He advocated the celibacy of the clergy and himself never married. He served as chaplain of the Third North Carolina Regiment during the War Between the States.
Dr. Patterson's memory is revered for his many acts of charity and also remembered for his eccentricities. With typical Greek thrift, he saved his parish a large sum of money when he planned and built the first rectory of that church. He lived there alone except for a colored waiter. He would often go into saloons and drink unhesitatingly with the men at the bar, and then he would say, "Well, gentlemen, I have done what you asked me to do, and now I would like to ask you to do something for me." Then he would ask the men to kneel that he might pray for their souls. The story goes that not one man ever failed to kneel for his blessing.
He died in Memphis, Tennessee in 1901. Soon afterwards, a stained glass window, donated by popular subscription, was placed in Saint John's Episcopal Church in Wilmington of which he was rector for many years, and it bore this inscription: "Faithful soldier and servant unto his life's end."
Lucille B. Edwards
Frances L. Harriss
NICKOLAS AND TASSIE COSTELLO
Nickolas Costello was born in Galaxidion, near the Gulf of Corinth, in 1865. When he was twenty-two years old he married, and in 1900 the son, Tassie, was born. In 1906 the family decided to come to America. They stopped in Philadelphia for ten days, then proceeded to Wilmington because Nickolas had heard that it was a nice seaport town. He was very fond of the sea.
The Costellos opened a store on South Front Street, carrying a line of fresh fruits, home-made taffy, and peanut candy.
Business expanded rapidly and Nickolas installed a soda fountain. Here he made a good deal of money.
Tassie was six when his parents came to America. He was placed in school almost immediately, and his teacher was very nice to him. She helped him to get along well with the other children of the school, especially the first year. The next year he became involved in a few fights. All in all, he made friends at school and also made high marks in his studies.
Tassie's father moved his store to another location, and Tassie had to change schools. His father became worried about his business and decided that he needed Tassie there to help him so that his wife might have more time with the little girls at home. So Tassie worked in the day and attended a night school. All this time he liked American girls and had already made up his mind when a boy to someday marry an American girl.
As Tassie approached manhood, about nineteen, his father was having difficulties with his business. Tassie began to look about for some idea that would help him. The elder Costello spoke and understood English very poorly, and people would go in and get things and tell him to charge it. He could remember their faces but not their names.
One day Tassie saw a picture of a tramp coming out of the sea, only to find that his clothes had been carried away. There was an empty barrel lying nearby, so the tramp picked it up, kicked the bottom out of it, and wore it about him.
This gave Tassie an idea. From that idea he started a dry cleaning establishment which he called the Barrel Laundry. His customers grew in numbers and before long he had enough to think about building a home.
In 1927 Tassie married Beulah Bennett, an American, of Masonboro Sound. They have two little girls, and they had a happy home for several years. Mrs. Tassie Costello was a designer and for several years managed one of the most up-to-date shops in Wilmington. All was well until two years ago when she was stricken with a hemorrhage in the shop. An examination revealed advanced tuberculosis. She grew worse, so Tassie took her to the State Sanatorium.
Tassie is very active in local politics and gives his views freely as those of a Democrat. He is the only foreign-born Greek selected to serve on committees for community drives.
Nickolas lost his buisnesssome years ago. He spends a good part of his time trying to get the people whose faces he recognizes to pay him something on account. The remainder of the time he helps his son in the laundry.
Lucille B. Edwards
Frances L. Harriss
TONY AND GUS MAVRONICKOLAS
Tony Mavronickolas, now sixty-two years old and a widower, was born on the island of Nikaria where he worked on merchant vessels. His wife was also born there. Tony's brother, Andrew, had already come to America, and he had heard that it was a fine place to live, a place to make money. So Tony decided to come.
Tony and his wife landed at Baltimore in 1908. At that time workers were being sought for the iron and steel works in Pittsburgh, so he decided that he would go there and make some money before joining his brother in Wilmington. He and his wife lived in Pittsburgh for two years, and there he took out his first naturalization papers. Tony thought the city was too smoky and dirty. As soon as they could save enough to pay their fare to Wilmington they came to live with Tony's brother. Andrew owned and operated a candy kitchen where he also sold ice cream and cold drinks.
Tony's son, Gus, was born in Wilmington in 1912. He started at the age of six to attend the public schools of Wilmington and attended regularly until he completed the seventh grade. He made good marks. He was allowed little playtime for he had to help in the store.
Gushad a determination to speak good English, so after leaving school he began to attend night classes at the business school. Here he found a way to master the language. He spoke Greek when talking with his father or mother but never at any other time.
In telling of his work, Gus said that he could shell peanuts as fast as the first shelling machines. When he first started to work for his uncle he said that his mother gave him some advice that he has never forgotten: "Treat everybody in a business-like way, be polite and attentive, listen to all they have to say, but don't answer too many questions or talk about yourself. Then nobody will know about your business. Watch the coppers (pennies), hold them tight, and you will soon have dollars."
As the Greeks had no place for their own worship Gus attended Sunday School and church with some of his schoolmates, but as the business grew he was kept in the shop on Sunday to serve the many customers. He said that he was glad to have an excuse to stay by himself, for his friends were not as nice to him as they once had been. When he reached the age of fourteen his social life began to stop, as the boys did not want a Greek to call on their girl friends.
Then his mother died about that time, and his father was so sad that he spent all of his spare time with him.
Gus was always kept busy on Sunday afternoon, for the Greeks were the only ones who kept such places open on Sundays. And this was a very popular place with the younger ones. Every Sunday these boys and girls would tell how they got their money to buy ice cream they would be given a nickel to put in the collection plate at Sunday School, but they would keep this nickel for ice cream and put a penny in instead. To what extent this had influence it is not known, but it was not long before the Blue Lawa were passed. This compelled the Greeks to close their shops on Sundays.
After the Blue Laws were passed Greek after Greek began to leave Wilmington, and among them was Gus uncle. This also meant that Gus and his father were to go. They moved to Pittsburgh, and while there two important events happened in the Mavronickolas family: Tony became an American citizen and Andrew married a young American girl. But the young wife began to show objections to her Greek relatives, so Gus and Tony decided that the best thing for them to do was to return to Wilmington.
Gus returned to Wilmington in the autumn of 1938 and opened the Minute Lunch Stand and is now enjoying a large business. Gus says that his father never associates with anyone, and he guesses that is the reason why he never cares togo out like other young fellows.
GREEK STUDY
Subject - Alexander Beztios, teacher of the School for Greek boys in Wilmington, N. C.
Writers: Frances L. Harris
Maurice B. Haskett
Editor: Edwin Massengill
Words: About 1300

Teacher and Waiter

Alexander Beztios (pronounced Ba-jos) was born some twenty-five years ago at Ioannina (pronounced Ya-ne-na), Greece, a town in the northwestern part of the country. His father was an accountant; his mother, a lady of charm and refinement.
Alexander had twelve years of formal schooling in Greece, including courses at a teacher's college, then he entered the University of Athens. He spent a year at Athens and then, in 1932, sailed for New York where his uncle was already installed in the archepiscopal palace. Alexander's father had come to New York during the hectic days of 1914 and was anxious for his son to join him in his new home. He had already decided that Alexander should study at New York University. George unfortunately died soon after his son joined him in New York. Due to financial difficulties attendant upon the death of his father, a year and a half's work was all that Alexander could manage at New York University. After some time had passed the archdiocese of New York, headed by the young man's famous uncle, came to the rescue by finding the young student a place as teacher of a small school for Greek and Greek-American children in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Alexander has not been here three years. This school is conducted afternoons during the term at Tileston School, one the city's larger public schools.
It does not take the place of the city's schools, but rather supplements their work. No girls are admitted to the classes, but about twenty-five boys, ranging in age from ten to fifteen years, are enrolled. Alexander, who looks more like a college undergraduate than a teacher, instructs the boys in Greek language and literature, history, and something of Hellenic philosophy and ideals. He stresses the glories of the Greek Golden Age in order to make his pupils proud of their race and to spur them on to a higher plane of thinking and living. So far he has stayed on as teacher two years longer than his predecessor.
With school days over until September, this summer finds Alexander working in the Brooklyn Cafe, a lower class confectionery-eating place which serves white people in one half of its building and Negroes in the other. This cafe is situated in a socially undesirable part of town and is therefore frequented only by people of the district. Probably not one patron comes there with whom Alexander has more than a speaking acquaintance. The cafe is owned by Steve George who turned the management over to Alexander while he manages a cafe for the summer months at a nearby beach resort.
Alexander Beztios, however, would not have you feel pity for him, nor would he have you think that his Greek-American friends are anything short of splendid. National pride, a deep-seated and exalted glorying in all that is Greek, prompts him to tell you how kind his friends are to him rather than to dwell upon their intellectual shortcomings. Beztios has nothing of the intellectual snob in his nature. He believes firmly in the native intelligence of the Greek, even the worst-off one who has had next to no advantages. But he does long for men and women of his own splendid kind with whom he can talk and associate. He longs for the intellectual communion he enjoyed with his colleagues in New York. His long working hours at the Brooklyn Cafe are so confining that he has no time to make contacts and friendships with Wilmington townspeople of his own scholarly kind. He lives in the midst of a large number of men his own age at the Y. M. C. A., but hardly knows any, even by name.
Last year Alexander made a special trip to Duke University to see about the possibilities of getting an instructorship in Greek. The head of the Greek Department there told him that there were very few students in his department, and that the three regular instructors he already had were quite adequate.
He was no little chagrined to find so few students studying his beloved Greek. The situation is much the same in Greece, he says, with commerce and vocational training steadily on by the increase, while the liberal arts are cherished by only a small group.
Alexander deplores the present political situation in his native country. The dictatorship of Metaxas has put an end to the democracy so dear to the heart of every true Greek No political freedom is allowed. Politics can no longer be discussed, and a Greek, says Alexander, is never happier than, when discussing politics. The ideals of the Greek Golden Age are being overshadowed by greed and commercialism. The government of England is considered the nearest approach to perfection -- a government which hallows the royal tradition but combines it with the practice of democracy.
Alexander has a warm admiration for the Greek Orthodox church and is working earnestly with the local Greek colony for the establishment of a church here. He looks forward to the monthly visitation of the priest from Raleigh. The magnificent Orthodox Mass is celebrated at the Parish House of Saint John's Episcopal Church, which church is also the scene of most of the local Greek weddings. Alexander says that the hope of the local Greeks is to establish a church with a resident priest who will also be a teacher for their school. Alexander, when questioned on his orthodoxy, admits himself one of the faithful. His close association with the Church through years of serving at the altar has left an indelible mark not to be erased by any of the doubts and fears that beset so many of our own intellectuals.
GREEK STUDY
Subject: Jimmy Patellos.
Address: Wilmington, N. C.
Occupation: Confectioner
Writers: Maurice B. Haskett
Frances L. Harriss
Editor: Edwin Massengill
Few people in Wilmington would tell you that they know Demetrius L. Patellos, but if you ask them if they know Jimmy, the genial Greek who runs the store at Eighth and Redcross, many of them can answer you in the affirmative. Jimmy Patellos--the "Demetrius" was anglicized soon after he came to this country--has successfully operated a business here for some sixteen years. The business is nominally a confectionery, but a visit inside discloses something of the nature of the old time general store. Jimmy's Negro customers--most of his business comes from this race--are sometimes hard to handle. After dark the store is often an unpleasant place. Drunken darkies have tried to wreck the place.
Jimmy was born on the rocky little island of Icaria in 1902. His mother and father, both of whom, are still living, belong to the peasantry. Jimmy himself was a son of the soil until he went to sea in the Greek merchant service, having left school at an early age. Soon after the young man had gotten his sea legs in the waters of the Aegean and Mediterranean, he decided to come to the united States. An older brother, Nicholas, had come to Wilmington in 1912 and was proving himself successful in the retail grocery business. A first cousin, Peter, had been a successful confectioner and restauranteur in the same town for even longer. Young Jimmy knew the poverty of existence in his mountainous little island of Icaria and longed for the economic security of the New World. So in the Spring of 1920 Jimmy, then nineteen, set out for New York. He had saved some money of his own and his brother had lent him some.
After landing in New York, Jimmy came straight to Wilmington. His brother Nick met him there and took him in hand. Jimmy knew no English, so he quickly procured a Greek-English Dictionary and set to work. Immediately upon reaching Wilmington, he enrolled in a private school. At the end of this time Jimmy considered himself sufficient master of English to discontinue his formal schooling and begin work with his cousin in his confectionery-restaurant.
His facile mind had absorbed the rudiments of English in an incredibly short time. Jimmy worked with his cousin Peter, whom all his acquaintances know as "Gabriel," for about three years. Then he went into business for himself, at the same location he now occupies.
Up until the time of his marriage two years ago Jimmy lived with a private American family who lived near his business. He had a clean but small and poorly furnished room for which he paid the generous rental of $12 a month. The landlady described Jimmy as a modellodger. She says he was so afraid of putting her to trouble that he would not even shave or bathe at the house, doing both these things in a back room of his store. He would, come to his rooming house late at night and leave early in the morning to be back at his work. She wept when Jimmy took himself a wife and moved away from her. He had befriended her and her family in so many ways that she said she didn't see how she could do without him.
Jimmy's wife (nee Christine Sandlin) is an American woman some five years younger than himself. Hers is the dark, rather full-blown beauty that appeals so strongly to Levantine men. She was an operator in a beauty shop for several years when Jimmy, the most ardent of fiances, lent her the money to establish herown business. Working for the other man had always been anathema to his creed, and he wanted the girl he planned to marry to be as independent as himself. He spared no expense in the matter of the new beauty shop. His credit with a local industrial bank is good, and he insisted that his sweetheart's shop be as good as the best. The shop has stayed steadily on the red side of the ledger.
Christine was reared in the fold Of the Southern Baptist Church, but Jimmy's devotion to his own Greek Church was such that he would hear of no one marrying him but an Orthodox priest. The marriage was performed in the Junior Order Lodge Hall, sometimes used by the Greek colony here. The glittering appointments and stately ritual of the Eastern Church completely dazzled the Baptist bride.
The store which Jimmy operates at the corner of Eighth and Redcross Streets is rented from a Negro fraternal order.
He does, however, own his home, which is a large combination store-and-dwelling in a white residential section. The dwelling houses the wife's beauty "salon" on the lower floor and has living quarters upstairs. The store part is rented to a dealer in antiques. Jimmy thought at one time of moving his own business here but decided that he was too firmly established at his old stand to risk a change.
The Patellos family now boasts one son, David, who is about a year old. Jimmy thinks that families should be neither large nor small, but "medium-sized." The Patellos have a large number of American and Greek-American friends.
They go out socially very little, however, as both of them work and work conscientiously. The lavish parties which the local Greek colonyhave from time to time are their greatest amusement. Jimmy subscribes to one Greek paper printed in this country, the National Herald.
He has never returned to his homeland since he left it in 1920. He loves his country, he will tell you, and speaks of it with wistfulness and a trace of nostalgia, but America he considers his real home. Here it is that he has founded his business and his family. He has a brother, a cousin, and numerous friends of his own Greek blood here with him. A little southern town on the banks of the Cape Fear means more of home to him than the tiny Aegean island that gave him birth. He is a good man and a good citizen.
Mrs. George Peschau
Frances L. Harriss
NICKOLAS PATELLOS
Nickolas Patellos was born in the village of Rahas, on the island of Nikaria, in January 1896. His father was a farmer of moderate means who owned and operated and almond grove and vineyard.
When Nickolas was sixteen he felt a longing for the country across thesea about which he had heard so much. He talked with his father, and his father mortgaged all of his property in order to get money for his son's passage.
Nickolas landed in New York in 1912, He had relatives there, so he soon went to work in a cafe as a dish washer. He could not speak a word of English, but he met an Englishman who taught him, teaching him three words a day for five months.
Then he was allowed to take orders to apartments which usually paid well because of the tips. In fifteen months he had saved enough to return every bit of the borrowed amount to his father.
Nick came to Wilmington in 1913 and there joined his cousin who operated the Brooklyn Confectionery. They formed a partnership and it has since continued. But they have closed the confectionery and now devote their entire time to a large grocery store.
Nick believes that business success depends on truth, honesty, and hard work. He still works from sixteen to twenty-two hours a day. Pride is a Greek characteristic, but he sends his parents money without them asking for it. He was able to send $1,000 to each one of his sisters when they were married.
In the World War Nick was a volunteer, joining the United States National Naval Volunteers. Later he became a petty officer on a submarine chaser. He received his final naturalisation papers at the close of the War.
In 1922 Nickolas married Marvika Kazakides, the ceremony being performed by a priest of the Greek Orthodox Church. Now they have three children, two boys and one girl. All the children attend the public schools of Wilmington and are being reared as typical Americans. The boys are members of the Y. M.C.A and the Boy Scouts. They attend Sunday School at the local churches with their American friends. Nick's wife takes an active part in the Parent-Teacher Association and has been a president of one association. They livein a large apartment above the store.
The Patellos have been to Greece once since they have married, and that was in 1986. They were over there six months then visiting relatives.
Mrs. George L. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
MRS. PETE PATELLOS
The apartment of Mrs. Pete Patellosis modern, the living room being furnished with an overstuffed suite, the bedroom being furnished with a modern bedroom suite, and the kitchen being furnished with an electric refrigerator, stove, and other modern appliances.
Mrs. Patellos is fifty-six years of age and lives here with her husband and Mr. and Mrs. Nickolas Patellos. She was Fotenie Tebissere before her marriage, and she was born in Philipopolis, Bulgaria, in 1883. Her father was the operator of a cafe in the best part of town. He died when Fotenie was only five years old, leaving his wife almost penniless and with four little girls. This resulted in Fotenie getting very little education. But her mother sold the cafe and bought a house where she operated a boarding house and also took in sewing. And under their mother's direction the four girls became expert seamstresses.
Then one by one the four girls began to marry. Fotenie, then twenty-one, met Arthur Kazakides who was living in America but had come to Bulgaria to visit. He was forty-seven. Before his five-months' visit was over he and Fotenie were engaged. Then he returned to America, but after nine months he returned to Bulgaria for Fotenie. Their wedding took place in the Greek Orthodox Church with four bridesmaids and four groomsmen attending.
For six months Arthur and his bride remained in Bulgaria, then they both decided to come to America. Landing in New York, Fotenie says that she was terrified by the hugeness of everything and felt smothered by the large crowds. They settled in Jersey City, but Fotenie knew no English and she became lonesome and homesick. After three months they again returned to Bulgaria. This time Arthur sold his interest in his cafe there. In Bulgaria their only child, Marvika, was born.
Thecouple remained in Bulgaria for three years. In the meantime, a friend of Arthur's in Wilmington had interested him in coming there. Arthur arrived there in the spring of 1910 and opened a small confectionery. His wife and baby followed him in August of the same year.
Fotenie said that she was determined to like America this time, and from the first she did like Wilmington. It was a small town with open spaces and more like the town in which she had been accustomed to living.
Arthur prospered in his business, but his health failed him before long. He died from asphyxiation in 1916. He left his widow with $12 in cash and an equity in a. small house.
Fotenie was made of the same material that helped to carry her mother over the hurdles of misfortune. She immediately went to work in a tailor's shop and worked there for three years when she had to stop because of bad eyesight. With the small amount of cash that she had saved she opened a dry goods business of her own. She also took in sewing. But she soon realized that her little business was a failure. She had made some unwise purchases of materials and found that shecould not sell them for anything near as much asshe had paid for them.
She had to do something else then, and she soon found employment in Pete Patellos' Confectionery. She was a clerk and kitchen helper. Not long after this Pete's cousin, Nickolas Patellos, arrived from Greece, and he went to work there. Within a short time he had fallen in love with Marvika, Fotenie's daughter. The marriage followed soon, and Fotenie went to live with her son-in-law.
Fotenie found romance also. Pete had been a bachelor for years, but the bravery, courage, and gentle disposition of Fotenie had won him. It was not long before they were married. The two couples moved together, and the two men own and operate jointly the People's Grocery Store, one of the city's largest grocery establishments.

Grayson W. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
JOHB AND ANASTASIA PONOS
Anastasia Ponos was born in Smyrna, Turkey, in 1904. Her father was a building contractor and had to work very hard for his living, but her mother came from a wealthy family of shipowners. Her mother's father was a Greek Orthodox Priest. Anastasia attended the public schools and had completed one grade in high school when the trouble between the Turks and the Greek settlement in Smyrna began. The Turks demanded that all the children be taught only the Turkish language. The Bishop of Smyrna refused to accept the demands, so the schools were closed.
Anastasia's parents fled with their children from town. Soon afterwards, the World War began. They found themselves refugees, suffering from cold and hunger. It was not because of lack of food but because the soldiers must have plenty. They were now in Thessalonica.
In 1917 fire broke out in Thessalonica and destroyed two-thirds of the city. All of the male citizens had been drafted into service, so the Government had to employ women to teach in the schools. Anastasia had made high averages, so she was given a position. But she finally resigned her job in order to return to Smyrna with her mother.
After the World War the Greeks and the Turks continued to have trouble. The Greeks had succeeded in capturing Smyrna, so her father thought it was safe there.
Soon after their arrival there John Ponos arrived from America where he had been since 1910. He was the son of a life-long friend and neighbor, Soon he and Anastasia were in love and it was not long before they were married at her home.
John Ponos was born in Smyrna in 1895, His father was a carpenter, and while he worked hard he was not always able to give his family all of the advantages. He died when John was ten and left a dependent family. At sixteen John decided to try his luck in the New World. He borrowed money for his passage from his uncle and sailed. He worked at manual labor in New York for six months, and at the end of that time he secured a job in a confectionery in Wilmington. He worked hard and at the end of two years had repaid his uncle. Then he opened a business for himself, a shoe cleaning and hat cleaning parlor. He did well and in due time became an American citizen. During the War he was drafted and sent as a cook to South Carolina. After the War he returned to Wilmington and opened a confectionery and prospered. In two years he decided to return to Smyrna. This is when he fell in love with Anastasia.
John and Anastasia decided they wanted to live in Smyrna, so John invested everything there in a confectionery. But this proved to be a poor investment from the beginning. Within a few months the Revolution broke out and Smyrna was captured by the Turks. They drove the Greeks out of the conquered territory.
The Christians had to barricade themselves in their houses and hardly dared themselves into the streets. But John was an American citizen and was not bothered like his neighbors. They wanted to get away from this, so John went to the American consulate for advice. They remained in the town until it was fired, then John took his wife, an expectant mother, and a few valuables and hurried to the warship. But the valuables were taken from them on the way and that left them without a thing to their name. They were taken on board and stayed there for two days. Then the ship sailed for Piraeus, but it had to return for more refugees so the people on board were placed on a Greek coal vessel. There they remained until they were taken to the American Y. M. C. A.
The time came for the birth of Anastasia's baby, so she was admitted to one of the best hospitals in Athens. Then on September 3, 1922, they sailed for the United States. Their transportation was paid and also their fare to Wilmington. John had friends there, so he was not worried.
In Wilmington they stayed with a friend, and this friend lent John the money with which to establish a hat cleaning business. Almost as soon as he had repaid the borrowed amount his place of business burned. He lost that and also had to replace the hats destroyed. But soon he opened a new place.
Now John and Anastasia are doing well. They have a nice bungalow in the best part of town, and it is nicely furnished.
They are still members or the Greek Orthodox Church, but Mrs. Ponos attends the Episcopal Church.
Nicholas, the son, has just finished high school where he made high marks, especially in chemistry. He plans to enter State College this fall where he hopes to major in chemical engineering.
Grayson W. Peschau
Maurice B. Haskett
ANTONIOS ROONDOS
Antonios Roondos, owner and operator of the Puritan Cafe, one of Wilmington's most popular eating places, was born in Trikkala, Thessaly, in 1888. The son of a farmer, he attended the public schools of his native village, ending his schooling at the end of his second year in high school.
In 1906 Antonios decided to come to America. He borrowed the necessary fare from his father and came over, traveling in the steerage. He had $12 when he arrived in New York and a taxi driver relieved him of five of that only to take him two blocks to a Greek restaurant. He had no relatives in America, but he learned at the restaurant that Greek workers were needed in the factories at Lowell, Massachusetts.
Antonios left for Lowell that night, arriving there with only twenty-five cents. He managed to get a job pretty soon sweeping floors at $4.60 a week. At the end of two months he had learned to spin and was paid $7-50 a week for that. At the end of three months he was able to send his father the amount he had borrowed for passage.
For two and a half years he lived in Lowell, but he decided that there was little opportunity for advancement there. After reading an advertisement one day in a newspaper he went to Indiana and started making candy. And there he learned to make 106 different kinds in six months. After this Antonios went into business for himself in Owensboro, Kentucky.
In 1912 Antoaios sacrificed his business in order to be able to return to Greece. He arrived there with $100 and a diamond ring. There he joined the Greek Army and thought against the Turks. He remained in the Greek Army until 1915 when he received an honorable discharge. Then he sold his diamond ring and returned to the United States.
This time Antonios went into the confectionery business in Lynchburg, Virginia. He saved about $250 and returned to Indiana and opened a business for himself. Then he sacrificed his business and volunteered for overseas service in the U.S. Army. He became the censor of Greek mail. After the Armistice he was appointed cook and remained with the Company until it returned to the States. Instead of returning with it Antonios became attached to the American Y. M. C. A. He helped to establish about thirty-five huts and was trying to make them popular with all the Greek soldiers. But the Greeks are suspicious of anyone bearing gifts and have been since the days of Troy.
In 1921 Antonios returned and spent most of the next three years in Alabama and Florida. Then in 1925 he went back to Greece and married an old neighbor of his, Evagelia Vezeris. They own their home, and the furniture is American with the exception of some tapestry.
Their son was born in Massachusetts in 1927, and he now attends public school. In 1928 they came to Wilmington.
They have remained here since, except in 1933 when they returned to Greece at the time both their fathers died.
Antonios became an American citizen the day he was discharged from the U. S. Army. His wife expects to get her naturalization papers in October. Antonios has been successful in business here, expecting only a reasonable return on his investment. He employs only local labor and only those in need of work. His ambition is to see his son some day operate the business successfully. Antonios thinks the United States the greatest and sanest country in the world today. It is his belief that the future Greek-Americans will take their place among the most useful citizens.
ZACHARIAS MAVRIKIS
A Greek of Wilmington, North Carolina.
Zacharias Mavrikis, who has Anglicized his name to Jack Morris, is part owner of the Dixie Cafe which has the best patronage of any cafe in Wilmington, North Carolina.
He was born in 1901 on the island of Nikaria, in the Aegean Sea about midway between the Greek and Turkish shores, in the village of Agios Kiricos. Jack describes it as a very beautiful, mountainous, rocky country, but for many years a shadow hovered perpetually above the dwellers, the shadow of Turkish rule. Fortunately, in the fighting between Greece and Turkey in 1912, the Greeks of Nikaria were able to throw off the Turkish yoke and since that time have been governed by their own people.
Jack is descended from generations of priests of the Greek Orthodox Church. His father was a schoolmaster for several years, but later followed the family tradition and became a priest; this did not, however, change his profession of teaching, as it was the custom for Greek priests to act as schoolmasters. They are frequently judges as well. Jack's father was distinguished not only for his learning but by the possession of a very fine singing voice, a gift which has descended in some degree to his son. As the father lead the singing in the Greek services and festivals at home, so the son does in his adopted home in America.
There were five sons in the Mavrikis family, all taught by their father and trained to habits of industry. They decided that they were tired of the restrictions of priesthood and were going to break the inherited priestly line in order to explore the wonders of the New World of which they had heard so much. America became the mecca of all their dreams, the land of adventure, freedom and opportunity. So, one by one, the five sons emigrated to this land of promise, each one who-came, in turn, writing back their joy and happiness in the fulfillment of all their hopes and dreams.
At the age of 19, Jack, the youngest son, decided it was time for him to join the other brothers and fare forth to seek his fortune. His decision was complicated however by the possession of a dearly loved sweetheart, his devoted playmate and companion from their earliest years. Fortunately for the young lovers her father had already gone before to seek his fortune in America. In the years after the World War chaotic conditions in the Near East drove many men to seek better opportunities elsewhere. Peter Carafas had been very successful indeed with a confectionery store in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Encouraged and advised by his prospective father-in-law, Jack and Alexanchia made their plans, Knowing that there might be years of separation ahead of them, they decided to be married, and that she would wait faithfully until he could prepare a home in the new world and send for her to share it with him. So they were married in their home village, with all the colorful and elaborate ritual of the Greek Church, the father of the groom acting as chief celebrant assisted by five other priests. They were attended by a best man, maid-of-honor and two flower children. The bride wore the traditional white weddinggown with train and veil, and both bride and groom wore chaplets of flowers on their heads, these being exchanged three times during the ceremony as symbols of the faith, love and courage which should endure throughout their lives together. The service lasted an hour and as the wedded pair left the church the flower children preceded them, scattering rice, wheat, flowers, and money, all happy omens of the future. The coins were eagerly scrambled for by all the children in the assemblage and carefully hoarded as luck pieces.
After a period of festivities, Jack carried his bride to her parents' home and left her until he could fare forth to provide a new home in a new and strange world.
On his journey he sailed to Alexandria and stopped for a visit with relatives in Egypt for three months, then on to France from where he sailed for America, staying only a short time in New York before going directly to his journey's end, his father-in-law's dwelling in Wilmington. There he found employment waiting for him in Peter Carafas' store, the Cape Fear Confectionery.
With an expression of pathetic amusement at past difficulties, Jack Morris of today described the loneliness and homesickness of the Zacharias Mavrikis of that long past yesterday. He knew not a word of English; he was self-conscious and sensitive and felt that everybody was laughing at him. He could not distinguish between a smile of encouragement and a jibe. He realized he had to learn the language of these people and be able to understand what was going on around him. Being well-educated in his Greek tongue, he provided himself with a Greek-English instruction book and went to work on it with a will. For sixty days he worked twenty-two hours out of the twenty-four, serving in the store during the day and studying his book at night, learning to speak English. Not even his father-in-law knew how hard he was working with so little sleep, out Peter Carafas was amazed at the rapidity with which Jack was picking up English. At the end of his sixty days of concentrated effort he could express himself in fairly good English on the usual affairs of his daily life and understand what was being said around him sufficiently to allay his timidity and fear of ridicule.
Jack applied most immediately for his first citizenship papers but a few months later moved to Ohio, thinking to better his opportunities. He was so eager to earn enough to send for his bride and establish a home for her. In the meantime, Peter Carafas developed a malady which compelled him to give up active business, so Jack returned to Wilmington and Peter went home to his Greek island, turning his business over to Jack. With hard work and long hours, the latter made a success of the confectionery store and was soon able to sell at a profit and start another venture with a cafe.
Owing to his change of residence his naturalization was delayed, and it was eight years before he completed his citizenship. He at once sent for his wife who came to him with all the haste she could make. She found that her husband had a nice home, completely furnished with more conveniences than she had ever dreamed existed. She was delighted at the ease with which she could perform her daily tasks.
Jack's wife is a very pretty and gracious woman, with the best education her island of Nikaria affords a girl. It is not considered necessary to give a girl more than a grammar school education. If she wants cultural subjects, literature or the arts, she is given the opportunity, but it is seldom that the Greek women of the island desire more than the household arts and to be fitted for a helpmate in fact to their husbands. She was restricted by a very limited vocabulary in English, and at times it is quite difficult to understand her. They own their home, and it is located in a nice residential section. They have divided it into two apartments, occupying the upper floor themselves.
Both the man and the woman expressed perplexity at the laxity with which Americans regarded marriage. To them love and marriage were regarded as among the eternal verities. When a Greek marries an American woman there is sometimes a divorce, if she wishes it, but no other Greek would consider fora moment any amorous approach to that woman. Their respect for her is qualified in many ways, but their loyalty to the Greek husband would preclude any thought toward his former wife except any help she might need, which would apparently be offered at arms length. The lack of governance of the children in American homes is another source of surprise. They will tell one frankly that they do not see how a people can survive through the centuries without careful parental control of the children. They do not approve of women working outside the home. The Greek women of the Wilmington colony do not assist their husbands at their places of business.
Jack attributes his economic success to hard work alone. He says he has always worked from fourteen to sixteen hours every day, until the last few years when he has been able to organize his own business in such a way as to have a little more leisure, reducing his hours to twelve. In the nineteen years he has been in this country, he says he had taken three days vacation, until December 1938, when he and his wife went back to Greece for a visit to their parents, all of whom are living. Jack and his wife love their native land. They were glad, however, to return to their home in the United states and were serious in their expressions of appreciation of their citizenship in this country and the freedom of opportunity allowed them here.
