Jim White
Audubon Blvd. (on premises)
Contacted Aug. 4, 1939
Submitted Aug. 19
"THIS BOY GETS LACKING SOULS
Everybody knows Jim White. Be is the most popular chauffeur in torn. They call him "loudmouth," and he lives up to his name.
Jim White is a brown man about thirty-two years old. He has been a christian five times in the course of ten years. "I've been religionized, unreligionized and anti-religionized, all in the glory of whacked-headed preachers," Jim states.
"This is how I got religion the first time: Me and Reverend Elton White was the best of friends. We used to go around plenty, had lots of fun together. Upped and downed the womens and drank like fishes, the two little fishes.
I had met White in Gulf Port, Mississippi. Both of us was gambling mens, used to crooked the dice and used bad cards. I can remember when White killed his woman with an as cause she wouldn't give him fifteen cents. He was bad! Well, he had four hundred dollars. Facts is, he stold four hundred dollars from an old widow woman and paid some lawyer….and out of that mess he got.
"Well, we went back to doing the same thing. But, round the later years things got stuff….tuff. The later years sho wasn't like the earlier years. The money wasn't easy to get, couldn't even steal it. Cause there wasn't no money around to steal. The games wasn't so hot so I comes on down to New Orleans, and I leaves White in Gulf Port. I hears from him several times when he went to Biloxi. In one of the letters he tells me he had started praying and actually seen the Lawd. I didn't pay that much mind. I figures White was crazy, had a blowoff of the head and was a pure lunatic. I got a job chauffeur, aint heard a word from White for years.
"A gal friend of mine, an old friend comes down here and looks me up. She says she wants me to take her to some of our openair camp meetings. I tells her we don't have nothing like that. She says we do, so I goes with her looking for religion. Can you imagine that? Of course, the gal is oaks. She's pack a fine bit of mellowness around her waist line. I got to thinking about them old days and tries to lay ' her. Get the jive? I tries and tries. She doesn't book and call. I tries and tries to make the gal give but she won't. I says why. She says you aint no christian. And my business done got to be Christianized. I laughs. Christianized? Thats me saying that. Can you imagine that, I says. Why gal, I knowed you when you used to sit on the bed and try to pee on the wall. Remember the time I used to grab you by your ass hole and make you fot? She cities. I don't catch on. I can't understand the stuff she's giving me, not at all.
"I checks on the woman. I makes her get deep into her business. And guess what I finds? I finds that White told the woman he blessed and she wasn't suppose to give her stuff to nobody but him. Man, I laughs and laughs. That was the funniest thing I ever did know anything about. I says to myself, well-do!
"I figures the gal had some sincerety about herself, so I lets her be. Lands sake alive, I went to some kind of a religious meeting and saw them people shouting and carrying on. That gal was going to town too. She was so happy and actually didn't know what to do. She kept singing and shouting that she male up my mind for me that there was no doubt about her. She had religion alright.
"I gets to figuring and figuring. I puts two and two together and I gets four. Well, I says, the woman must really be a christian woman. She gets her dope, and she leaves me. I says where is you going babes. And she says she's going back to White. I aint said nothing right away, but in a little while I says is he really a preacher. A good preacher? Then she says, 'he done give his bad ways and don't even think about the devil. ‘Then she says that White dote bless his church so much not even a storm can move him. I says well, well-do!
That gal ups and leaves me. Away to Gulf Port she goes. In a few weeks I gets a letter from White. It says that he is doing all right but he doesn’t like Gulf Port and he doesn't like Biloxi. He says he wants to come to New Orleans cause he figures he can make it here. I says with all these churches and preachers running over each other. He says yes, cause hea’s using suppin’ what the people likes. I didn’t know what he meant, but I lets him go with it.
“Lo and behold, White comes to New Orleans with nothing but religion. He had a few bucks but not enough to amount to nothing. He comes to me and he tries to get me with that religion talk. I says, man don't you know I know you. He says quiet on the off-beat, doesn't you know that the Lawd came up to me lak a natchal man and told me to go forth and teach all nations. I says, man with that jive you got you better not to no whar and teach no nation but the nigger nation, cause if you do them white folks is going to have your ass smacks in Jail. Then he brings up some stuff about Saint Peter. I says, you can talk all you wants to about Saint Peter or any of them other Peters. You aint no man who has no business being christien cause your bad life is done been so bad you can't be fo'given.
"Old White didn't budge a bit. He kept on talking about how much of a christian he was. Then he takes up with my old gal what came down. Remember? She comes and gives me some stuff. Talking about she was revolutioningnize the world. She pulls me down in a chair. He stands over me and they beging some crazy talk about, 'Lawd...dy...dy.. Lawd...Lawdy....take ther heart of this man and move it....move....eee..... e..e..e it. She him that the earth in all of its blistering bad ness can't always go againt your preachings....Let the light from the stars shine down on him tonight; let the open face moon glitter with the happiness you gave all Jerusalem when the Son was born....oh Lawd....dy...Lawd...dy...La...w...d....dy...'
"I says why in the hell don't y'all out that damn mess out, and they stops! The gal says the nerve of him talking that away in the presence of the Lawd. I says, Y'all can't fool me. In the presence of the Lawd nothing, in the presence of two damn fools.
"Them people, let me alone, but old White says the only way to get me to his way of thinkin' was to put bad mouth an me. He says like this...I remember it well.. 'You is going to lose your job. Cose, I hate to do this Jim, but its the will of the Lawd, not me,'
"I aint paid a bit of 'tention to old "White, thought he was the biggest fool in the world till he got to talkin' with seething he says he saw up in the ceiling. I don't know just that white said he saw. I was so soared...cose he didn't know it.. I didn't know what to do. Man, I was just standing there while White was looking up at that ceiling. He was just a-talking: 'Don't do it now...don't do it now. Wait: Maybe he'll change. Don' do it now...please! If you strike him dead I just know I'll be held for it.’
"Then White and the gal turns to me, and they says: 'Jim, take our word fo' it. Come. Come while the Lawd is giving you another chance. Maybe its yo' last chance. Come now! Maybe you'll walk outside and drop? dead. Come now!
"Now, you know thats enough to make anybody soared, don't you? I was she soared! I got sick at their talk and ran White and the gal plum out of my house. Went on to work the very next day and I aint telling you no word of lie my boss started raining hell with me. Fussing up a breeze about nothing at all. I says to him, why is you raising so much hell. Here it is I've been working for you nine years and never before has you raised so much hell as you is doing today. I'll tell you sumpin. I told him. A nigger preacher says to me that you is going to fire me. And I wonder if you is going to do what that nigger preacher says you is going to do. He looks at me and he says. 'I don't know nothing about no nigger preacher but I know one thing. I'm. sho going to fife you and now!'
"Man, don't you know that man fired me just like that? I comes on back and I don't say nothing to nobody. White come running to my house all excited. He says, 'You is fired Jim. I knows it.' I looked at him. I was so mad. I says, you black bastard. You done made me lose my joh. White says, 'thats the best thing that could-a happened to you.’ I says why. He says. come on join my church. I says if that will make things better I'm sho going to join your church.
"Come to figure it out. Guess why he wanted me to join hus church? He wanted me to join his church cause go wanted to get some credit on my name. If I'd let him do that he says he'd make me head-deacon. I says, can I bless ‘em like you did Hazel? He says, 'yon can bless em and take 'em too.’ I figures thats religiou So, man me and white got together. The furst thing he did was to go downtown on Rampart street and get him some clothes. ‘All preachers got to look good,’ he says. ‘Thats the furst thing.’ I says go ahead. Me, I done been a pussy chaser all my days. And I sho did know that you can plenty of that in a church, and money along with it. My only worry was white. If would only pack square, I says. Cause White had done stold money by the carloads. And I says maybe the Lawd done fo'glve him, buy I sho aint.
“To make a long story short. Me and White got together. He opens a church right here in my front room. He was blessing 'em on the forehead and in my bed. The Gal was out bringing! ‘em in. She was the gospel saver. She was pretty straight I found out. The trouble with that poor gals was that White had her all geared up. She was beleivin’ everything. It was too bad but it was true.
"Things was getting along fine. I wasn't looking for a job in the world. I says there aint no need of working if things can keep up like this. I had done paid up my rent. Things was fone I’m tellin' you. Man. I had done fo'gave White cause he was preachin' real religion. There was time to pray and time to play. Thats religion, my religion. Man. I was laying it. Then all of a sudden Whites comes to me and says, .I kind of be. leives that we is doing too much. Our religon is getting second play and it ought to get furst play."
"Well, I says maybe White is right and I loosened up a little. I had some good gala who was streamlining it on the line. Came in with the food and the money. Man. I ' had on my long purple robe and them womens sho like them long robes. They think you is the Lawd himself or somebody like him. Man, that robe was diggin' up a mess. But Old White got gealous end came talking that stuff bout we was layin’ religion too far in the background, and me, like a fool, ceased. Man, as soon as I ceased old white stold all my gals. Took all the money and skidooo. Even left his gal. Built himself a church. and thats where I figures preachers aint no good. and to hell with them. even if they are your friends. Yeah, me and the gal made it alright. but she couldn't get rid of that religion, so I quit her dry.
"I fo’gave White. years went by. and do you know that sonofagun came back to me and jived me out of loaning him some money, ten dollars. It was a long time fore he paid me, and I didn't do nothin’ but vent to him. Just like some big banker, he tells his chief stewardess to give me ten dollars and he gave it to me. White tried to siring me into his church. Smart fellow. had one of them goodlooking gals to gun me over and invite me in. She was talking up some smart talk a-breeze. I did a lot of figurin’ and didn't do nothin’ but give in to White. I hung around his church until I got weak fo’ that woman and before I knowed it I was right in with White again. But, do you know that White fucked me again. It seems that somebody told him that the gal was alright and he didn't do nothin’ but take her plum away from me.
"So. I figures it aint no use. Religion aint fo’ me and I aint fo’ religion, cause as soon as I get religion sumpin' unrcligionizes me. What about White? Man. In all my life I was never so finish with a man like I'm with White.
"Its a good thing his name is White cause there aint nothin’ else White about him, no indeed. That boy's priok dictates his religion. yes sir, He don’t use it to pray with, but he sho does use it to get looking souls.
"This boy gets lacking souls."
Interviewed.
Submitted 8/23/40
Every man has a right to think for himself, act for himself; and to do the things he thinks are most necessary.
With this in mind, Moses Williams, a tall, 42 year old dark boy, who insists that his figure is stream-lined because he is well built, is Ant a religious man and is very indifferent toward certain principles practiced by other men. Because of this he is behind the bars in the Parish Prison, mainly because he cracked two skulls, shot a woman and "pitched a boogey," in a night club which means that he put out all the lights and began throwing glasses at the guest.
Moses states that he isn't a bad man. This was verified by the jailers who made him a kind of a straw boss because his husky voice rolled as if it had extraordinary power. It makes prisoners Jump and help the jailers to maintain order.
Moses does little work, if any, in the jail. He isn't as big a shot as some of the others but Moses enjoys the same previlieges as the others. Having graduated from a dishwasher Moses is very well acquainted with the kitchen in the jail and eats nicely. On several occasions the warden had to let Moses know who was boss of the kitchen by hiting hem on the head with a frying pan. Several times the warden caught Moses nimble fingers attempting to steal out of the huge ice-box that has more ice in it than anything else. Because he is a great pork chop eater Moses is always trying to steal them. "Pork chops is my dose. Doctors say I must have them and I begrudge the warden because he won't let me fill my doctor's prescription, Moses stated with a broad grin on his face.
Moses Williams was born in Edgard, Louisiana, a place where Negroes are classified as either high yellows, blacks and browns. The near white Negroes associate with white people, call themselves Creoles. The brown Negroes exclude themselves from the lighter complexioned ones while the blacks are entirely out of the spotlight and are regarded as inferior.
There were hundreds of kids whose privileges in Edgard are few, but Moses Williams states that he didn't have any.
"The law was against me, the white people was against me, and the Negroes didn't leave me alone," he says. At Christmas time Moses’parents were too poor to buy him toys and the other boys and girls in the neighborhood didn't let him play with theirs because every time he would several of them were missing.
"I went to the second grade, how I do not know. When the teacher felt like teaching the whole class she gave me some time, when she didn't she gave all her time to the other students. I guess it was because she was disgusted with me because I used to take the kids lunches, Moses explained, continuing: The only way I could get anything in Edgard was to take it and I took everything that came my way including bad colds and bad luck.
"I was the only child in the family; everybody used to tell my ma and pa that I ought to be out in the field but I didn't figure I belonged in the field because the work was to hard, and furthermore, I didn't want the sun to make me no blakcer. I was having a hard enough time as it was. Mr. Witherspoon, the boss, said he would have anybody in the field but me because I stole two of the billy goats for thirty-five cents then I went to the pond and took the billy goats back. I guess the sheriff would have put me in jail a long time ago but he was kind of sweethearting with my cousin. Couldn't tell her from white. How she got to be my cousin I don't know; but he was my cousin and she was some gal. She used to win all the sheriff’s money playing coon-an. I used to be a gambler too but they used to always catch me cheating so nobody would play with me anymore. Wasn't la mess?
I started doing all right when I was 15. Told my ma and.pa that they didn't have to work on the farm as far as I was concerned because I found me a Jane to give me some clothes and put some flips on me. Boy, I was really taking life easy. One day the sheriff told me he could put me in jail; said that if I was in New Orleans, they would lock me up because I didn't have any visible means of support. What I wanted was the means, I didn’t, care for the visible or unvisible. I don't know how I got to stealing but I liked it. I never much with the things I took. I didn't take them from people who were poor. I figured like Huey long a man has a right, to share his wealth with me. If he. didn't share with me I took my share. Sho I used to take diamonds, gold, and brass took everything that came my way. I never was looked up for it. Cause aint nobody had no proof that I was stealing from them. They knowd that my woman; Malinda Jacobs, who worked for the biggest man in Edgard they knowd that Malinda was putting them flips on me and I sure didn't have to steal.
I was soon getting tired of Edgard, all the fun they had there was dancing.
James Willie
2319 Felicity.St.
Interviewed 7/20/39
Submitted 7/27/39
JBMES WILLIS, THE SUGAR CANE MAN
"I can cut cane and do anything anybody else does, but I aint goin. never cut no cane cause they don't pay nothin’ and there aint no fun to be had in the. country. The country is as cold as ice. I'm a city man, and I lak mah city fun."
A long, tall, sloo-foot, black man is talking, and he means what he says. His name is James Willis. He lives with a yallar woman who makes her money "shaking herself."Her name is Sadie Brown, and it is an appropriate name for the things she does. James, Jim for short, explains it this way: "There never was, and will always be, a woman whose name was Sadie who wasn't smart. Thats why I brought her from the country. We came down the river in a tow boat, a water mellon boat, seven yars ago. We didn't do no talkin'. I jest told Sadie to go her way and make her. money, she went. Then I told her to bring her money home to me, and she did. Thats what I calls a woman wid temperment."
Sadie and Jim live in one room in a flat on Melpomene Street, in the heart of Negro frivolity, where they shoot dice in the daytime and figure ways to get money at night. Their roam, is very ordinary. In fact, it is characteristic of the people of the neighborhood. The roam is dirty and forlorn. There it one bed in the roam, also a stove, dresser, two chairs and an armour, which used to house Jim's fine clothes. course, Jim's doesn't have any fine clothes now, they're in the Security Loan Office on South Rampart Street. "I had to pawn ‘em What else was I going to do?" Jim says with a wink in his right eye.
It wasn't necessary to trick Jim into telling his life history. He willingly told it with pride.
“My life history aint much, it aint long, and it aint excitin’ but its my life history, and here it goes:
"I was born right in Plaquemine, right back of a field as wide open as a hen's ass. My pa's name was Jim, lak mine's, and my ma's name was Emma. Both of 'em worked on the farm. They did everything, and anything the boss wanted 'era to do. Ma and pa couldn't figure, so they took whatever the man on the farm gave 'em. The folks said that pa worked himself a house. Yeah, in other words Pa made enough money to git him a house, but he never did git it. The folks? Who was they? They was my cousin, thats who. And they worked right along wid my pa and my ma. You know, thats what got me in bad wid plantation people. They make promises, but they don't never keep 'em.
"Cose, the man says that pa drank all his money, and owed him his life when he died. I don't know about all that. And there is a lot of things I don't know about but I do know that pa was gipped. Say, I members the day when pa and ma went out and sold twelve dollars worth of 'tatoes to fix the roof on our house. The boss told 'em that if they wanted a roof on top of their house they would have tomake some extra money to pay for it. So, pa got him some 'tatoes and went to sellin’ 'em. The boss. Who was he? His name was Link Wilcox. The boss took all the money. Told pa that he was goin’ to fix up everything, but he never did. Thats what pa told my ma. I don't know. Pa drank so damn much you didn't know how to figure on him. I knows, but I don't think he'd tell a damn lie about anything, I don't.
"School? Yeah, I went to, school. I went to school in the church back of the shell house. We had an old preacher teachin' us,' but he was funny. Say, that preacher spent all his time playin' wid the young boys pinna. He’d grab mine and I'd let him keep it. Where did this go on? It went on in the back of the church, thats where.
He used to say it wasn't right to do nothin' lak that in the church. I didn't give a damn where he grabbed me, as long as he grabbed me. And jest between you me I liked the way he grabbed me. Cose, I don't go fo' that now, cause I can't, cause Can't. Sadie is too stuff:
“Anyway, I didn't git much education. Went to the third grade. That was enough fo' me. I had had enough from that preacher, and there wasn't nobody else around. I Aint seen nobody around to teach me nothin’ Man, listen, I was born to be smart. I know how to live, and I know how to make money, jest lak you see me. I aint nobody's fool, even if my head do look lak a butter bean.
"What I did when I left school? I did this. I went into the field and shucked me some corn and stuff. I made lil money but it wasn't the kind of money I wanted to make. I kept my eyes -wide open. I wasn't only eighteen then. I kept bummin' around the smart boys. Used to watch 'em collect money from the wimmen. And man, I aint tellin' you no word of lie, I tried and tried to git me a yallar woman, but you know I couldn't git a one. Man, yallar wimmens was sho hard to git fo’ a ugly man lak me. I aint got a yallar women till I was twenty-five yars old. And Lawd today, how I got that one I don't really know: But I got her, and that is all I'm thinkin’ about. Say, people in the country don't go fo’ black womans in the country, they is too. many of ‘em But, they aint too many good lookin’ yallar wimmens. I always did say let the white mens make 'em, we’ll take ‘em from there on, yes indeed!
"How I made out in the country? I made out alright. Cose, I aint had no plenty money, and I had to be satisfied wid small time stuff. Why did I git marry? Man, didn’t I jest finished tellin’ you that I couldn’t git what I wanted, and I sho wasn’t foolin’ wid what I didn't want. I keep tellin' you I aint no fool, didn't I. What I thinks? Man, I don't thinks when it comes down to facts. I'm one man who KNOWS thats what goin’ to happen is goin’ to happen. The day is set: And when your day is set there aiat notfhin’ you can do about it, thats all. What they calls that? Predestynation? That what I b’leives in. Say, man when I was in the country a friend of mine went swimmin' when everybody he knew asked him not to do it. What was that? He had to die that way, didn't he? I b'leives he did.
"Why did I leave the country? Well, I tell you. I jest left cause I couldn't make no headway in the country. Sho, I shucked cane too. Cut from one up to two down. In other words, from Sun up to Moon down. Made one fifty a day, but I aint goin’ try again, cause fo' the furst point, the people drives you. I knows cause they used to drive me plenty. I was always right in line, but the boss man wasn't never satisfied. Seems lak he was always pushin' fo' more. The mens in the lead rows was too god fo' the others, and you jest couldn't make things go. I tried and tried but I jest couldn't make things go, that was all. And when my pa and ma died I got this gal, and gave up. Left the country on a water melon boat. None of us, me neither the gal had twenty-fice cents betwix us. I always did hyar that you didn't need no money in N'Awleens. And that was right till the depression. Well, when that came it was a different story. It got stuff, and times got hard, but we made it O.K. Where Sadie got the money from I don't know. It wasn't my business. Thats what wrong wid people. They meddle too much in the other fellow's bisness. I aint goin' to do it, me.
“How I net Sadie? Well, I'll tell you how it happened. I tricked her. I hate to say it but I tricked her. You see, here's what happened. I told her that my ma had left me plenty money and I -wanted to take a trip on a water melon boat wid a shine gal who had dim blue eyes. Sadie said jest lak this? "I'm yo' gal if you is goin' to N'Awleens to spend yo’ money.' There it was. I was htebigest liar in the world, and I knew it. I gives Sadie the jive, then I commence layin' it on her. I outdid myself cause I had a yallar woman. She laked my stuff, and took it wid all she had. I gave and she took. We jumped on the boat. I gives her a few bucks, and she falls fo’ the ‘g’. We clicks right on the boat. I let her give the captain a lil bit, and he feeds us. He gives Sadie a few bucks, and I takes it away from her. We did alright. We lands in N'Awleens on a landslide. We gits a house on our jive, and I lays the landloard. Sadie lays the grocer at the corner of our house and we gits along fine.
"When I finds that we was doin' alright, and by the way, Sadie had done got the truth and agrees wid me. I'll tell you how. sho did that. She says I know her life and I let her lives it. So, she begins to lak me plenty. Man, we clicks. Then I gets a job workin' on a ice truck. I. keeps the job till depression ruins everything. Then I gits on the W.P.A and everything goes fine. Sadie takes her vacation. She don't fool around no more. You know, Sadie can cook, so she gits herself a job cookin' fo. some white people in Rosa Park, or some whar. We does fine then fo' true, cause Sadie brings home the food, Man, them fiddles was sho good:
"Well, I’m still on the W.P.A. They tells me that I'm goin' to be out. Then, maybe Sadie will git her job back again, I don't know. Sadie has gotten to be such a big aristocratic lady, you know. Sometimes I asked her if she is crazy, or sumpin'. I speaks up to Sadie jest lak a lady wants to be spoken too, cause, cose, I aint tellin' her this, but Sadie is gittin' sweeter in her old days, And when a woman gits sweeter in her old days thats sumpin’
"We is livin. alright. What? Can Sadie have a baby? No indeed: Say man, Sadie done throwed way mo’ babies then yo' ma done wipe roaches out the house. And that aint no word of lie. I keep te.llin’ that fool that she is taking a chance wid her life, but she don't pay me no mind. She says she don't want no baby, and thats that, thats all. Man, what you' goin’ do when a woman won't listen. I wish she was hyar now. Maybe she would tell you the reason, she sho won't tell me.
"I’m goin' make it, regardless, I'm one black nigger who sho don't worry. No indeed! Say man, don't you know that a man's life is lak a rabbitt’s. He’s got to run lak hell when things go wrong. If Sadie and me ever mess up I’m sho goin’ to run lak hell!"
A tinge of deceit was running from Jim's veins, he smiled broadly and continued: “My boy, I been around wimmens a long time, and I been around work a long time. It don't pay much to pay any attention to neither one. Thats why I aint payin' no attention to nothin' hyar and nothin' I see. Sho, I done seen happenin' right on my job, but I figues they aint no need of me payin'nno atention to it. Its goin' to happen anyway, aint it, What I does about it I aint goin' to do no good. My boss is always tellin’ me that I don't worry about myself and nothin' else, and I don't neither. I figues its goin’ to happen anyhow. Jest lak I see Sadie doin' things, but do you reckon I'm goin' to fuss about it, No indeed. I aint goin' to out off my nose to spite my face. I aint nobody's fool. Sadie is restin' now, but when I lose my job she's goin' to unrest. Didn't I say she was workin' at furst. Sho, but I means that she aint doin' no funny bisness. Hat I know. Oh, I got a way of knowin’ alright.
"Sho, I feels that education is alright. Everybody needs it. Its alright fo' them who wants it. But I don't care nothin' much fo' it. You see, I got my mind on matters of another matter. I works fo' mine, and when you works fo' it, and can git work its a horse wid a different tail. Thats the way I figures it. One thing, I aint goin' to worry.
"You can out thisndown. I'm one ex-cane cutter who is goin to be one ex-cane cutter. You can put me down as James Willis, the sugar cane man. If I wants to cut it I sho can, and that aint no word of lie neither."
June 6th.1940
Compiled from more visits to
Emiline Wilson.
Well after my baby got to the woman in New York, a Mrs power -- mind you no s on her name...It was power , not powers.. The woman was very particler about that, both. Emmy and Mrs Power liked each other right away. Mrs Power had rheumatism bad.. well they call that a new fangled name now. Art-thritis one had it so bad she couldn’t walk -- had to be lifted in and out of bad.. course Emma didn’t do that -- she had a trained nurse with her all the time-- first thimg she had Emmy do was to read to her -- I guess she saw how swart Emmy was right off -- Emmy liked to read too -- "she learned that from having to stay in door. so much down here.. Well things Were different up there -- You been to New York? -- well you know how it is up there.. they don’t stop to look at you to seewhether you is black or white. -- Mrs Power said she wanted to keep the promies she made to let Emmy go too colored school, out when she saw how white Emmy really was she said it would be foolish to do that.. Emmy said she wanted to try it any way and she did --she started in a colored school, but after one year, Mrs power went to her place up in Conneckicuk and then rode made Emmy go to a white school. Emmy sure did learn and passed all her grades -- She want to High School and all the time Mrs Power was getting to like Emmy more and more -- Emmy liked her and things was so nice for Emmy that she sort of took chares of Mrs Power and after a while she began making Mrs power believe in herself and forst thing you know Mrs power was up on crutches and helping herself. Emmy sure was en-- en-- you know what I mean- when you is happyabout something -- enthused? -- Yeh thats it -- Emmy was enthused about it -- she used to write me almost every day about how Mrs Power was doing -- till Igot to sort of knowing Mrs Power too -- The doctors said that Emmy did more for her than all the medicine they could give her. Well first thing I know Emmy was finished with High school -- graduated and with honors too -- Mrs Power wanted to send Emmy to college -- The best of collages too -- for girls but Emmy said she didn't want to do that -- she didn't tell Mrs Power why. CEPT that she said it would mean that she would have to leave her to go to college and she didn't want to do that, well Mrs power moved back to New York and let Emmy take a business course -- stenographer and clerking work -- Emmy wrote me why she didn't want to go to college and -- well I guess I kin tell you, but promise you want toll anybody about it -- cause I don't want you to think that Emmy thought hersllr better -than white girls -- Member all the tins I told you that Emmy wasn't eshased of being colored and wanted to live that way -- well Emmy wrote and told me she was ashamed of the way the girls carried on at her High School -- She said I would understand -- but I guess I'm old fashioned and it took me a long time to believe that white girls would do the things Emmy said they would do..They didn't do those things in my tine -- white or black -- she said that the girls around her ago all they talked about was going out with boys -- mostly in automobile parties and carrying on -- drinking with the boys -- and hugging and kissing them -- Emmy said she went out once or twice with them and all the boys wanted to do was to carry on.. she said that all the girls would talk about was Ser -- course dont misunderstand aw -- I dont mean all the girls in the school but cost of the crowd that Emmy know.. Emmy said they pestered the life out of her.. Wouldn’t take No for an answer – I mean the boys – Of course you know how pretty Emmy is and she’s got a fine figure too – well the lest time she went out with the girls she told them that she wasn’t for carrying on the way they do – One of the girls told her oh don’t worry about your date this time – He’s a nice boy – well Emmy wont and this boy got nasty when she wouldn’t do what he wented her to do and he got rough with Emmy and tore her clothes and tried to assault her.. Emmy fought him back and had a hard time of it – but Emmy was a samrt girl – she used her nead and tricrat hat boy – She promised if he’d behave she would de what he wanted and they started to go in town and Emmy tricked the boy into getting out of the car and then nick as a riash she used to drive Mrs power’s car and she knew how – well Emmy went home and she didn’t tell Mrs power about it – but she never went out with boys again – She told one of the girls what happened and where the boy could get his car and what do you suppose the girl told her?.. Well sir she said – Maybe I shouldn’t tell you – Well this is just what Emmy said and Emmy wouldn’t lie to me – first place Emmy herself wouldn’t think of saying a thing like that.. She said the girl said – hat the Hell are you doing saving it for the worms.. Emmy couldn’t believe the girl – She said to her – But aint you afraid to do things like that – Take such chances – suppose something should happen to you – suppose you want get into trouble if your friendly with the drug clerk at the drug store.. Can you believe anything like that?—young girls too – Not more than 13 or 17 – well Emmy wanted to whit school but she was afraid that if she told Mrs power the reason that Mrs power might have started something at the school and as she only had a few months to go to graduate, she kept quiet, but she never went out again with any boys in that crowd – She said that the very girl who bold her not to be afraid had to leave school cause she was pregnant -- and other girls left school too and she knows it was because they was all in trouble. Its hard to believe that such things go on today -- but it’s the truth mister or Emmy wouldn’t say it. -- Well Emmy came to New York and after a course in a business school, she was ready to get a job but she told Mrs power that she wasn’t going to work for any white men -- Mrs power like Emmy so that she convinced Emmy to work for a white man -- she said that Emmy could n’t work for a negro and live with her and she didn’t want Emmy to leave her – Well Emmy did it – but she had to wait all her jobs for the same reason – All the men were after her for dates – she had her taste of boys I guess and she would n’t go out with any of them. She said theyall just wanted the same thing – Finally she made up her mind that she’d get a job with a negro – she met a young feller in Harlem – she said she went to a dance up there one night after she had left her job when the man got too fresh and met this negro. He was a lawyer and was almost white too.. Emmy said in Harlem you can dance with white or colored so she told this man she was colored and he took her in his office and she’s been with him mow for almost three years – He wanted to marry Emmy but Emmy said No – I dont intend to bring any children in the world and let them go through what my papa and mammy and me wont through – You know Emmy got all Mrs power’s business for this young lawyer and He handled it fine – course Emmy I guess know all about Mrs power’s business affairs and that helped.. Course she left Mrs power but she saw her all the time – every day – She rented an apartment in Harlem – a small place and is very happy. She goes out with this lwayer often – guess maybe they’re in love – but she just want marry him. Course you know Mister that in New York you don’t have separate cars for colored and white or anything like that and Emmy says there are so many people up there that they don’t pay any attention to your color – she says she can go to white place and colored places with this lawyer, cause no one lin tell whether they are white or black – She comes down here twice every year to see me – She keeps wanting to take me back with her bit I guess I’ve learnt to – Eevn if they dont know whether she is white or black up there they certainly would know if I lived with her and that would make it just as hard for her as down here.. Course Emmy says she don’t care whether folks – Her boss knows and she is colored an doesn’t care whether folks knows it or not – but look now – If I went up there I bet her Boss couldn’t go around with her and me and I must know it wouldn’t work out – Mrs power I forgot to tell you died and left Emmy $1000 and some stocks – Emmy gives me anything I wants for the house and all the money I need to live very comfortable. The money she put in the bank and she saves money too besides – She comes down here twice every year and stays two or three weeks..She don’t live with me – cause I don’t want her too – would be trouble – Now wouldn’t it – well you saw herand you tracked her – course I aint saying your intentions wasn’t good – I believe they is or I wouldn’t be talking to you about all this – She rents a room way up town and lives in a white place – she comes down here and spends all her days with me – It works out all right and no body bothers her.
PRIDE OF HERITAGE……
She takes a sent in the white section coming to Canol Street and then sho site in the colored section til she got down here… She gets off three or four blocks up or down before she hits this street.. When she leaves Lare its usually dark she comes again the next day.. And loume tell you Sister when she’s vistiting here the wagons from the stores bring to all sorts of things for the house—she don’t ask me what I wants – she just bouys them and has them delivered – She knows I wouldn’t let her buy me all those things—but they is nice aint they?.. Look at that nice radio and my store and ice box.. and Igot nice clothes too – And lenne tell you one thing she never does forget every time she comes and that is her Daddys grave – she just has it rilled with flowers all to time she is here and even when she goes back she wires flowers for his grave on his birthday and the day he died… I tell her I always does that but she says Don’t make no difference—she wants to remember her Daddy herself – She know what killed him Mister. Its sure been hard on boy but after all she’s got everything she wants – she’s got money in the bank – she gives me more than I need with all the latest gadgets thrown in and – will she couldn’t have done all that if she hadn’t been with Mrs Foxer—she would staid here and God knows what would have happened. And after all its our religion… If its hadn’t been for that country preacher and God working together that coupled never would have had that accident. Emmy goes to church regularly—A nogro church too – and whats more she never fell for that Father Divine to there – oh they tries to get her to join his creed or whatever you call it – but not Emay – Emay says they know she’s got a little money saved and that’s what they is ofter – No No Mister I don’t believe I could let you meet Emay – I don’t lie her but I wouldn’t tell her anything about my telling you all I told you – course she’s come back now and I don’t know whenshe ‘ll come down again – wont be till next winter, but I wouldn’t tell Emay about you and remember your promise too Mister, not to toll anybody where we lives and not to put this story in any papers… Woll it wouldn’t do you a good anyhow, couse I don’t take anychances of anything ever hurting Emay and I don’t stay in one neighborhood long. After Emay comes down twice no moves, so you couldn’t find us no how. Sure you can come around some more but I guess I’ve told you all there is except one thing I forgot – Emay sends money regularly to that church and that nogro preacher in the country and to my sister and her children too and not only money but presents from New York – I am proud and I thank God for her, even if he did take away my old man.
