SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: THE COLLINS FAMILY.
Date of First Writing	January 2, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Jules Collins nad son, Jim (colored)
Street Address	62 Collins Street,
Place	Fairmont, S.C.
Occupation	Mill Worker (Picker room)
Name of Writer	Ruth D. Henderson
Name of Reviser	Regional Office
Date of second revision	March 23, 1939
THE COLLINS FAMILY.
"Well, Miss," said Uncle Jules, "but I sho' thought you one dem women frum de gov'ment offices. 'Cose I ain't disappointed much, hut you look jest like Miss ---, can't call her name now, but I bet you knows who she is. Yes, I put in fer my pension last March, but I ain't hyard a word yet. I thought when I seed you coming dey's mtt sending at last to 'vestigate me. Dem women take me in a little room and ax me all de questions dey can think of; den dey say somebody would be sont out to 'vestigate. I ax'em if dere's anything else dey want to know, and dey 'low t'warn't nothing else; and dat's de last I ev'r hyard frum it." Uncle Jules smiled wanly as he sat in his rocking chair, the only article that offers a semblanoe of comfort in the ramshacklee house. When he smiles he shows his only teeth; and, as he says, "one pints no'th and t'other so'th."
Short, black, and moon-faced, <text not clear> a gray stubby beard that curly on the ends.
No place could be seen on his tattered overalls that had not been patched and repatched. Not a single button was <text not clear> on his garments, but safety pins, dangled here and there He pushed aside his home-made cap and scratched his gray head.
"Sho' 'nough Miss, I thought de gov'ment had done sont you to see 'bout my pension; but being it ain't dat way, I'se be glad to tell you anything I'se can. Maybe you could tell me something about it, anyways.
"Oh yessum, I'se plenty old enough to git de pension, all right. I'se been gwine on sixty-five ever since I give it to 'em down dere last March, We runn'd up my age and found dat I wuz bawn 'bout de time war wuz over --- when dey freed de slaves, you know. I sont by Mr. Gaston and told him to ax 'em if dey had any pleas aginst me. I knows too much to be sassy -- don't git no-whar dat way. Dey jest say dat dere's nothin' wrong, and dat's all I know to dis day. You knows you jest has to do de bes' you can and dat's all.
"Slavery? I don't 'member nothin' of slavery time, fer dat's 'bout de time I wuz bawn, but 'cose I'se hyard mammy and pappy talk 'bout de war sometimes. I wuz one of de little 'freedmen'. My mammy wuz a slave of old Gen'al Miller dat lived down at Moore's. My pappy, be belonged to Mrs. Van Dyke, but he changed his name to Collins - dat's his pa's name - atter he wuz a free man. Same spell it wid a 'g', and den some spell it jest like Collins' Bee Hive. Don't make no diff'uns.
"My mammy and pappy got married befo' they wuz sot free. I'se hyard talked how dey married back den; some say dat dey jumped over brooms and things like dat, but hit wuz all changed time I got big 'nough to git married. Mammy said de slaves wuz treated purty good and dey had plenty to eat - sich as it wuz - but dey had to work mighty hard. When I wuz a little chap, I used to go to de Nazareth Church with my mammy holding my hand. I'se members dat right good. De colored folks all sot in a corner to demselves. Mr. Reid wuz de fust man I ever hyard preach. He preached dar at Nazareth fer a long time. I knowed his son well. His name Mr. Whit, and he's one of dem men dat measured off land -- surveyors, yes, dat's it.
"De slaves worked 'round de house fer a while atter dey's sot free. I used to be one of de little house-boys fer Mr. Joel Miller. Atter I got older dey sont me down in de lowlands to make it de bes' I'se could. 'Cose, de rest of 'em had to git out too. Dey had to furnish everythin' and de land; and de slaves - now freedmen - got one-third of what dey made. Sho' wuz hard times back in dem days, and de houses den wuz made of hewn logs, wid a door in one side and a winder in t'other. Jest plain old mud wuz dabbed in de cracks to keep out de cold and rain. All de cooking wuz did on a great big open fireplace. Dey used pots and ovens to cook in. Coals wuz raked out'en de fireplace and de oven sot on dem; den some coals wuz put on top of the oven, too. I'se sho' et some mighty good eatings cooked on de open fire.
"In de fields dey raised jest 'bout what dey does now. I'se made a good hand in de wheat field -- I'se been cradling all my life. De cradle has a whole passel o' fingers on it, and you jest sweep it along and cut de wheat. De binder comes along and stacks it up, den de stacks is put in de stocks, atter dat it's carried to de thrasher. 'Cose, dam times done changed now -- fust day used yoke oxen, den dey use horsepower, and now dey uses engines to pull de machinery.
"My fust memory be when I wuz sont out to 'thin grass' and tote water. Dat's what de little younguns had to do. I'se went to school jest a little, but soon's I'se got big 'nough to work, den dey sont me to de fields. Time I got fifteen I'se made a good hand, and I been at it might near ever since. I had brothers and sisters dat helped out on de farm, but soon as dey got big 'nough to leave dey scattered out and I'se can't give no 'count of 'em now. I had three or fo' sisters, dere names wuz Sally, Emily, and Katie. Had 'bout fo' brothers, too, I think. Let's see; Mike, Nelson, Henry, Mose -- dat's right, Adam, dat's makes five. Mike's de oldest? he wuz bawn, I 'spects, 'bout fo'ty-five."
Jules was more interested in finding out about his pension than he was in relating his life history. At every opportunity he would inquire: "What does you spose dey gwine do 'bout us old folks? Looks like time is I'se be hearing something frum dat pension money," Then he would furrow his brow and reluctantly try hard to recall his early life.
"When I'se wuz 18 years old, I'se had to start paying road tax, I paid dem tax on and on till I done got two years past de age 'fore I'se knowed it, I told Mr. Scafe Gaston and he went and seed Mr. Harper, and he's de man dat got me off de tax."
"No suh, dey ain't never give back de extra money what I pay done wuz my fault. I shoulda axed 'em 'bout it.
"When us hands used to be working way down in de bottoms of the farm we's don't come to de house fer eats. De cook sont it to us. We had plenty to eat most de time -- had lots of corn bread, peas or beans, and de like of dat. S'pose no spring wuz close 'bout where we'tins worked den dey brought water fer us, too. We had a well at de house -- yes'm, dey used a rope wid a bucket tied to one end, like dey still does sometimes. Dem boring wells jest come out in de las' few years, we didn't knows nothin' of dem den.
"Yes, I 'spects times is better'n dey used to be in some ways. If a person got as much as twenty-fire cents a day, dey thought dat wuz a whole lot of money. Trouble now is too many people - two to one to what dey used to be. Why, when I fust comes here, dere wuz no houses a-tall, hardly, Dere's five or six to one house here in Fairmont to what dere wuz when I comes here. So many folkses - don't knows how in de world dey is all gwine to be tooken care of - dey jest gwine here, dere, and everywheres.
"I ain't never so much as been out'n de county but one time - dat wuz fo' I'se married. I decided to go to Asheville, so I sot out walking, I jest wanted to go and see a little of de world, "When I got to Landrum I waited fer de gravel train. I wuz aiming to cotch it and ride de rest of de way, but dat train got off de tracks same place down de road and never did came; so I had to walk all de way. I sho' felt like I wuz gittin' out'n de world when I got dere. Fust man I seed on de street wuz Mr. Dave Cohen, from 'round where I wuz - he one dem Republicans. Oh, dat's a man dat can lawfully marry people and sign papers and things like 'o dat. He says, 'Jules, what you doing way up here, no wayf' I feel kinda impor-tant like, and I say dat I jes' looking 'round de world a little. I walked on a little piece and stepped in a restumrent and -- who does I see? Nobody but Mr. John Mucklerath -- he marry one of my mistress's daughters. I told him whar I'se wuz gwine to stay aai everythin' so he could tell my folks back home, in case dey jest wanted to track atter me fer somethin' or n'other.
"Well, I done jest a little of everythin' while I wuz in Asheville, Fust job I landed wuz in a quarry -- dat's whar dey blasted rocks out of de ground, I'se got fifty cents a day den, as hired help wuz hard to find. Atter dat, dey put me to cooking fer de men in de camp whar dey slept and et. I stayed up dere in Asheville from August till Christmas eve. I wuz kinda gittin' a little homesick and it got so cold up dere I'se figgered de bes' thing fer me to do wuz make my way back home. I got myself all bundled up and went down to de station, but fo' I stopped at a frolic fer a spell, De wind got to blowing -- Lawd, how it blowed."
Here Uncle Jules rounded his thick lips and made a buzzing sound, imitating the wind.
"I said to myself, I says, 'Jules, chile, hit's high time you'se gittin' to dat station.' So's I struck out. Well, when dat train pulled in, it wuz kivered with snow as deep as my hand. Den 'bout time it started peppering snow all over de place, and wuz I glad to git on de train, never gladder in my life. By de time we got to Spartanburg, de snow wuz two hands high on top of de train, but hit wuz aginning to rain here. Dat jest goes to show you de diff'uns in de climates of de two places. Us don't have no big snows down here like Asheville folks do. I bet hit's snowing up dere right dis very minute.
"T'warn't long atter I come back 'fore I got married. Dat's when my trouble rightly commenced. Ever since den I sho' is had hard times -- Lawdy, hit's been something awful. 'Cose, fer de fust twelve or thirteen years we got 'long sorta smooth sailing like. During dis time our chilluns wuz bawn. But atter dat, things got worser and worser.
"I done heared 'bout people up in dem mountains git boun' in by de snow. Dey tell me it snow so deep sometime it cotch de people in dey houses so dey ain't kin git out till all de snow melt in de springtime. I ain't want none er dat, so,
"Nancy, dat's my wife's name, she jest got so she wasn't satisfied no place no time. Atter while she got so she wouldn't 'tend to de chilluns and wouldn't do nothin' a-tall. Jim, here, he'll tell you de same thing.. He knows I jest as good to Nancy as I could he to my mammy. He knows I'se had a hard time."
"Dat's sho' is right, I'se don't like to say it'cause she's my mammy", said Jim. "I had to larn to cook and do might' near everything a woman has to do 'round de house. Po' little Roxie, dat's my sister, had to make bread when she had to clamb up in a chair to reach the table. Yes, us all sho' had a hard time; den dere's Joe - he's my brother - who is 'round two years younger dan me, he went and most lost his mind and we had a awful time wid him."
"De way it wuz wid Nancy," Jules continued, "atter so long a time she went plumb crazy. She talked 'bout eating jay birds and sich crazy talk. She got so bad dat everybody got scared of her, 'kaise we couldn't tell what might happen. 'Cose I wuzn't 'xactly afeared of her, but tain't no use taking big chances. One time she got atter some foiks'es chillun and runn'd it all over de place; right den and dere we knowed she had to be sont off.
"I'se went to Spartanburg and seed the sheriff, and he got some doctors to 'xamine Nancy, and dey say she sho' wuz crazy. Jest to make deirselves co'vinced, though, dey kept her in jail fer a day or two. Dey put her in a cell wid a 'nother woman to watch and see what would happen. De other woman wuz not crazy but wuz in jail fer stealing - some jewelry, I think - and she say to Nancy, 'What fer you in here?' Den Nancy say, 'What fer you want to know, and more'n dat, what is you doing in dis jail?' The sheriff is listenin' all de time, peepin' through a hole to see how Nancy would act. Nancy grabs de woman and dey tangle up; fust Nancy's on top, den de other woman, up and down, 'round and 'bout. De woman commences to call fer help and dey has to take Nancy out and put her in one dem solitary cells. Next day dey sont her off to Columbia.
"Oh yes'm, she got better and come back. When I got de word she wuz coming home, I sont fer her in a buggy. Somebody had seed her on de road headin' home, dat's why I sont somebody fer her. When she come in, I say, 'Nancy, I want a little talk wid you.' I wanted to see what kind o' mind she wuz in. So we walked up de road and talked fer a spell. I told her I had forty dollars in my pocket, and if she would come home and stay and do like she ought to do, I would give her de money to buy her some new clothes and anything else she wanted to buy wid it. But she only say to me dat if I had dat much money I ought to spend it on de chilluns. She say dat she gwine to get herself a job cooking some place and den she could buy her own clothes. She say, too, dat she didn't want to fool 'round no home and dat she would come and git her younguns. So Nancy got a job cooking fer a lady dat lived over yonder on de hill. Den one day Nancy comes back and axes de chilluns what dey 'tends to do. Dey's knows Nancy ain't 'sponsible fer her actions, so's dey tell her dey gwinna stay wid their pappy and dat her place is home wid her chilluns.
"Nancy started throwing one of her fits when de chilluns showed her dat dey cared more fer me than fer her. She says, 'Dey ain't none of your chilluns, dey is my chilluns, but you'se turned 'em against me; you'll pay fer it one of dese days.' Every time dat she started raging she would deny dat I wuz deir pappy. I sometimes believes her, but it don't worry me none 'kaise I thinks 'bout as much of 'em dat anybody could. She left without the chilluns and never did come back atter dat, not e'en when she got sick.
"You know what -- dat woman went and married agin, sho' did. Dat wuz atter she comes back frum Columbia. Den she went down agin and got past going. Roxie went and waited on her till she died. She sho' stuck by her mammy through all of her devilishment. Den Roxie come back home, but hit wuzn't long atter.dat Roxie got married and moved off frum us fer good. She moved up de road 'bout two miles on de Anderson place and she's been thar ever since.
"Nancy's been dead 'bout - let me see - Roxie stayed wid her right atter she got her fust job when she tooken sick, nearly two years. Then she got better and got a'nother job, but hit didn't las' long neitherj so Roxie went to her mammy agin and stayed wid her de rest of her days which nigh close to fo' years. Dat make it six years." (Jules added all this up by his fingers, counting the first two and adding the last four.)
"Back twenty or twenty-five years ago mill help was skace and a Mr. Gibson comes out to de farm to see 'bout gitting Joe and Jim to come to Fairmont and work fer Mr. Thomas in the mill. He told dat dey could make more money in de mill and -wouldn't have to work so hard and such long hours. Den when we'se moved I'se wuz failing in my health and wuz no 'count on de farm anymore. Mr. Thomas put dem in de picker room working long hours, dat is, until here lately dey won't let 'em work but a certain number. Ain't dat right, Jim?"
Seeing his father's fatigue, Jim, who had been a silent listener, took up the story. Jim is very large. He, too, is black but bears little resemblance to his father, if Jules is his father. Jim explains everything he tells by motions of his hands. He goes so far as to get out of his chair to mimic the actions of those about whom he is talking.
"Our farming days wuz hard ones. I'll tell you. 'Way back yonder durin' de World War," Jim began, "my pappy wuz manned out from a white gentleman's house jest 'cause he wouldn't tell a lie fer him. You see, die gentleman had a cow and she went and got out and gits into another white gentleman's crop and jest 'bout et it all up. So he tells my pappy dat if he don't swear dat it wuz somebody else's cow, dat he will have to move off his place, Dis not all he does, he sets the law on me fer not jining the war. He had a son dat jined and he didn't want him to. He claimed dat I'd been dodging it, but dat ain't so, Dey comes and gits me all right, and puts me in the calaboose. Didn't dey, Pappy? Dat's not the wurse part of it; dey fined us. You see, dere wuz more dan me in it. 'War dodgers' dat's what dey called us. Den we had to pay a fine of fifty dollars apiece. Atter we'se gits out of de jail dey 'xamine us and everythin' and den the man sont us home to wait fer a 'call card' that never did came, jest like pappy's old age pension he put in fer, it never come yit, either."
With this last sentence, he let out an obstreperous laugh. Jim had been reticent, but now his mood had suddenly changed and he wanted to talk. Jim's temperament is quite different from that of Jules. He smiles almost continuously and keeps his hands and arms in motion all the time he is talking.
Questioned about his early life, Jim said: "I never went very fer in school, 'bout de fo'th grade, I'se specs. You see, since mammy and pappy wuzn't stayin' together, I had to take de part of de woman. I had to hope brang up Roxie; den I allus had to be takin' oare of Joe, kaise his mind wus bad. I went 'round on de hill and worked fer white folks when I had any spare time. I used to scrub dere floors fer dem, and dey got so dey called me 'de little colored gal'. Dey liked my scrubbing 'kaise I'se git de floors jest as white as snow. Den when I gits through wid one house, dere allus be somebody waitin' fer me to go to dere house and scrub. Fust I puts soap in hot water and lets it melt; den I gits me a bucket of sand and wets it real good and throws it on de floor. Atter dat I po's de hot water on de sand and starts to work. Dat's de best way in de world to git a floor clean -- hit sho' makes 'em shine. Dey all tells me dat I do's a good job. Some gived me a dime, and some fifteen cents."
"Jim, I would like to know something about Joe. Where is he now?"
"Well, Joe, he wuz allus 'off' a little bit, but as he got older he got wurse. I allus tried to keep him in and not even let him out in de yard 'kaise white girls wuz afeared of him on 'count of him laughing at dem, but once in awhile he gets out anyway. One day while I'se at work, Joe slips out of de house and goes down to de mill store, and as he wuz such a big, strong, and believed-crazy person, all de people runned out and leaves de store wid him. He picks a long meat knife up from de meat block and lays hit across his arm and walks 'round and 'round looking at different things. Mr. Nat Thomas, card roam boss, comes up to de picker roam and tells me 'bout Joe. I'se runned down to de store as fast as I could, but stopped as I reaches de door and peers through de crack fer I knows Joe has a long knife and I'se didn't want to enrage him. I stands and watches him. He walks over to de radio and turns hit on and walks over and picks up a big bottle of gingerale. All dis time, I'se watching and thinkin' how to git to him. Somethin' gived me strength, so's I walks to de door and tells him to lay de knife back on de meat block. He wuz a little slow in doing hit, but final he 'beyed and laid hit down. Den I say, 'Joe, what fer you leave de house,' Den he say, 'Jim you's ain't mad wid me fer leaving, air you? I jest having a little fun.' Den I say, 'Cose not Joe, you ain't did any crime.' I noticed dat Joe had kept dat ginger ale so's I say to him, 'Joe, lets go out yonder tinder dat big tree and drink dat ginger ale.'
"Well, we went out and sot down under de big tree and commences to talk, fer I knows good and well dat de white folks done gone to town atter de law. If Joe knowed what I did, a pack of hounds couldna cotched him. It wuzn't long before I hears a car motor and I knows right den dat dey's coming atter him, Joe's paying dem no mind when de cars drives up, jest looks at me kinda sad-like.
"Den de police comes up and grabs Joe by the arms - two on each side of him - but he's such a powerful man and jest throws 'em off, jest like you could a baby; den he starts to git up and 'fore he does I'se knocks his feet out from under him, den de law nailed him good and mighty. Dey puts him in one of deir cars and carries him to de Spartanburg County Jail where he stays till pappy goes to de judge and gits de permit papers so's dey can send him to Columbia. Dat wuz three years ago. I'se went down to see him jest once since he's been dere. Dat wuz my fust trip to Columbia, too. I'se ain't never been many places, and never did ride on a train. I'se ridden the P. & N. (interurban electric line), though, and de fust time I rid it, it sho' did scare de fool out'n me. Hit started so quick dat hit slinged me right over the seat; den when hit stopped, it might nigh broke my nake. De fact is, all de places I'se ever been is Campobello, Greenville, Pelham, Forest City, Gaffney, and Columbia."
Jim confessed to being superstitious; and he told of a trip to Spartanburg with his foreman, Mr. Thomas. He and Mr. Thomas were on their way down the road just the other side of Fairmont when a black cat ran in front of the car. He said that he asked Mr. Thomas to turn around and go some other way because a black cat was the sign of certain bad luck. Mr. Thomas just laughed at Jim's warning. When they arrived in Spartanburg, Mr. Thomas became suddenly ill and had to see a doctor. He was having a chill - one after another. Finally, thinking that he was all right, Mr. Thomas and Jim started back home, but more bad luck struck them. A tire blew out. Jim got out and proceeded to fix the puncture. He hadn't quite finished it, when Mr. Thomas called out to him to hurry because he thought that he was going to have another spell. Expressing it in Jim's words: "So's I'se jest throws the patch on hit and hurries to get Mr. Thomas home. And you knows what, Mr, Thomas wuz in bed sever'l days atter dat. But still dat man don't believe dat black cat wuz 'sponsible fer our's bad luck, but I sho' do. I'se allus did know and allus will know dat black cats is bad luck, Yes'm, and I ain't never gwine to change my mind, either."
At this point Jim looked at the clock on the mantel and remarks that it's about time for him to get down to the mill. He opened the door and said, "I'se sho' hopes dat dey don't do pappy as bad as dey did me 'bout sending me a 'call card' fer going to de war. Do's you think dat he'll ever git dat pension?"
"Of course, he'll get it, but they may be some time getting around to it. You see, there are probably a hundred ahead of him. But I am certain that he will, in the near future. By the way, Jim, if you don't mind telling me, what do you make in the mill? Is it very much more compared with the farm wages that you remember?"
"Well, I'll tell you, Miss, hit sho' did work de life out'n po' old pappy dar on de farm, 'Cose I'se works purty hard in de mill, but hit ain't hurt me none. I'se makes $8 some weeks, dat's when I'se sont out and only gits part-time, den sometimes I'se makes more. Hit sho' is better dan living on de farm whar you has to git up way 'fo day. Here I sleep late as I wants to in de morning as I'se don't has to go to work till 2:30 in de evening, I'se 'specs hit's jest 'bout dat time now.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: DID HE LOVE ADVENTUR?
Date of First Writing	March 9, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Ned Harvin
Fictitious Name	William McAlister
Street Address	1707 Hollywood Drive
Place	Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Wreck Servicer
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
"William McAlister was run over by the mail train in Sumter and his left leg cut off" was the shocking news that went flying about the little town of Manning, South Carolina, forty-four years ago. The next day, this useful and influential citizen died, leaving an aged mother and four little children, who were dependent on him. The youngest, William Jr., was three years old, and his nother had died only three months prior to this accident. Left without parents or home, he went to live with his uncle, who owned a home between the Congaree and Wateree rivers, near their junction.
About thirty years later, the newspapers contained a story about William McAlister, the facts of which ran something like this: Due to very heavy rains, the Broad River was in flood stage. A fellow named Watson and his two boys went out in a small boat to rescue a coop of chickens for a neighbor. Their motor was drowned, and they were stranded more than a half mile from land. Mrs. Watson, who had taken them to the swamp in their car, waited anxiously all night for their return. When morning came, disappointed and frantic, she carried the news to Columbia. Just as soon as William McAlister heard about this, he got three other men together and started for the swamp.
In deeperation the men had clung to staunch swamp trees, around which swirling waters raced from Friday afternoon till Saturday afternoon. The water was still raging when the McAlister party reached the scene. Only the tops of telephone poles could be seen. But they started out, not knowing what the reeult would be. For a time it seemed a hopeless task; however, obstacle after obstacle was overcome. They were within a few feet of the frightened men, when they found they could not move another foot. Watson saw their predicament, however, dropped into the raging water, caught hold of a drift-log that was wedged in the tree they had climbed, and made his way, hand over hand, to the boat. William and Joe followed their father, and in little more than an hour after the rescue party had left the swamp, all seven men were safe on the bank again. It was February, and rain had fallen steadily for several days. Equipped with umbrella and raincoat, I want to spend an evening with the McAlistors, who lived only a block away.
Mrs. McAlister, a perfect blonde, was lovely in a blue shirtwaist dreaa that evening. Gentle and enduring, she is also capable.
"We're so glad you've come over. We want to have a game of Chinese chackers," Mrs. McAlister said. "We are so tired of the rain."
"Looks as if we're going to have another flood," I suggested. "Want to rescue some more folks, William?"
"Well, I'm not wanting to see anybody in distress. I'd gladly go after them again. I am expecting to be called out any minute to pull somebody out o' the mud. These streets are awful where they're paving. I was just laughing about an experience I had in the flood of 1908. I am a sort of swamp bird by nature, you see. Uncle Ben had a 1500-acre plantation, and 500 of it was on an island, Buckhead, about two miles from the house. This was pasture land, and Uncle Ben raised lives tolk on that island - horses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, and everything. Well, sir, when those rains descended and the floods came that September, even Buckhoad was covered with water, the first and only time that thing has ever happened.
"About 3 o'clock one afternoon, Uncle Ben called to me, "William, the river has risen a foot in the last hour. Get up a crowd of Negroes, and bring everything up to the house quick as you can.'
"I was about sixteen and had plenty of the don't-give-a-darn spirit. I took some Negroes and went out in a flat with an outboard motor to haul in the sheep, goats, and hogs. The horses and cows had to swim, and occasionally a cow would give out. Then we'd have to tie a rope around her horns and tie her head to a tree, trying to keep her head above the water. One of the cows gave plura out, and I called out, 'Boy Wilson, jump out the boat and get that cow. She's drowning. Tie her head up quick.'
"'Hell, no. I ain't gittin' outer no boat to-night, Cap'n. Dat water too black an' col', an' I scared, Boss. 'Clare to God, I ----'
"With that I hauled away and knocked him overboard. Instead of going to the cow, he went to the bottom and didn't come up only some bubbles on the water. I sat there scared half to death. I grabbed a pipe pole we had in the boat and run it down where he went over. Finally, after what seemed hours to me, up came Boy Wilson. He had fallen in a well, the curb of which had been washed away, and he had an awful tine getting out. But I've always had a warm place in my heart for Negroes. 'Course we used to fight, an' all that. Uncle Ben always told me if I ever let a Negro whip me, he'd give me another one whan he heard about it. One time I was sure I was in for two whippings.
"The cook's boy was named Bull-Ox, and we just had to fight every now and then. But he could just about handle me. One day we were chopping cotton, and Bull-Ox called me a liar. I waded in on him, He wallowed me in that dirt, over and over and liked to beat me to death. So Uncle Ben gave me three days to beat Bull-Ox.
"As luck would have it, the next day we were dipping guano out of the same sack with two condensed milk cans and putting it in buckets to be carried to the distributor. This time Bull-Ox called me a damn liar, an' I lit in on him proper that time. It was the worst fight I ever had in my life. And all the time I was remembering that I was to get another beating if I let him whip me. Finally I got him down and tied his hands behind his back. Then I picked up the sack, which was about empty, pulled it over his head, tied it under his chin, and hit the ball to the house. 'All right, Uncle Ben, I've whipped that damn nigger at last. Come on, lemme show you.'"
"'Don't cuss, Bill. I'll whip you for that;' Uncle Ben said. He followed me to the field, took the sack off the Negroe's head, and I thought he'd sneeze himself to death. But I had beat the nigger, and after that he was careful what he said to me.
"Those were great days for me. I fished and hunted, morning, noon, and night. Uncle Ben planted acres and acrea of peas, and it was no uncommon thing to see thirty coveys of birds in one afternoon. I had two dogs, Burt and Lottie, and, for my twelfth birthday, Uncle Ben gave me a gun. Pretty soon, one November day just before Thanksgiving, I was hunting in a broom sedge field. Lottie flushed the birds. I knew she sensed danger. Her bushy hair stood on ends; her left leg shook as she held it up in the air. I moved towards her and saw a rattlesnake coiled and ready to strike. I shot away without taking aim. I must have blown it into fifty pieces. It had twelve rattles and one button, which I put in my little trunk and kept for years. I've killed dozens of snakes, but never have I been so thrilled over killing one."
The 'phone rang. "The corner of Blanding and Marion? Okay, I'll be right up, old boy."---"Ruth, somebody's had a wreck. Don't think I'll have to be gone long. Good-by.
"Bill does love to talk about his life on the farm, and now, since he's losing his hearing, he likes it even morek" Mrs. McAlister remarked "He's always loved people a lot, and he misses the joy of conversation terribly. He thinks the noise of motors had something to do with his deafness; but I'm not sure of that. He has a brother who is stone deaf, and we both flear he'll grow worse as he grows older. He and Nell are real pals. I wish he could persuade her to go out with him more. She is too studious and ambitious for her own good."
Nell, a lovely teen-age girl, had been reading French and had taken little interest in the talking back and forth. "Mumsie, darling, it's about tine for me to go. You've come to a poor subject now. No, really, I can't study quite as well here, and I'm going to my room. Good-night to you both."
"I found her reading parallel this morning at 3:30," Mrs. McAlister continued. "She's been doing extra practicing for the county music contests, and now she has the State one to look forward to. Love her music? I should say she does. I don't know how many medals and certificates she has won. She won a scholarship to the Northfleet School of Music in New York last year, but she was not a high echool graduate and couldn't go. We hope she can go thia next year, though.
"Tell me something about Rebecca," I asked. "When I last heard of her, she was a charming debutante, dancing, singing, and reading at every social function in Columbia."
"She's still singing, but it's lullabies these days. It was a great disappointment to us that Beck fell so in love with Bob Nardin that nothing else but a marriage would satisfy her. We hed high hopes of a real career for her after the year's study with Madame Schumann in New York. But I'm beginning to feel that, after all, perhaps the mating of a home is more important than a career. They have a darling baby, and are very happy in their new apartment in Beaufort, where Bob has a good job. Did you see my hyacinths? I've had a birthday recently, and Bill always likes to bring me flowers to accorpany the check. 'Hyacinths to feed the soul; his card read."
Mr. McAlister returned from his trip to the wreck, "Nobody hurt, Ruth, I'll get the cars in tomorrow and adjust the insurance. Those fellows told me the six prisoners have been reprieved. I haven't read the Record today. Have you seen about it?"
"No, I hadn't even heard it, but I'm glad. You know you and I do not agree on the subject of capital punishment."
"Well, if we can't control crime with it, what would we do without it, I'm wondering. I not only believe in it with all my soul, but I think every man should see one execution, at Ieast. I've seen three, and it should teach a valuable lesson, I'm tolling you."
"Oh, I see. That accounts for my having such an ideal husband, does it? I may have to change my mind about electrocutions yet, eh?"
"Well, I wouldn't say just that alone. All those floggings I got when I was a boy must have added a little something to my make-up. They started back in that one-room school house in the sandhills. If the rabbit hunt ended on time, I was always there for roll call; if not, it was too bad.
"Then when high school was the order, I had to be on time, for I had the job of carrying those twenty-five or thirty kids back and forth to Eastover every day. That bugle my uncle gave me, with the blood from the Spanish-American War on it, called them out to 'battle' every morning, and I got a big thrill out of the summoning. What grade was I in? Lord, I don't know. I was supposed to be in the eighth or ninth, but I reckon I really was in the third.
"The next year, Uncle Ben sent me to Prof. A. R. Banks. I stayed there one year, then went to the university. Nothing at the university interested me, except football. That year Carolina beat Clemson, and I helped do it. But, when the season wae over, I 'quituated,' I went in for wrestling matches and won about everything.
"Money hadn't been any consideration to me up to that time. My father had three houses in Manning, and the rent on them had about paid my expenses. Uncle Ben and Aunt Hallie hed been strict as the mischief with me, and I hadn't had anything to throw to birds. How the Gregory-Condor Motor Company offered me a job and apaid me six dollars a week, three of which I paid for board. They kept raising me till I got sixty dollars a month. Got married on that salary."
"Bill, do let me tell Martha about our courtship," Mrs. McAlister cut in, "We lived about seven miles in the country, and one day mother, grandfather and I came to Columbia to spend the day with the Garners, driving Lord Leland, our bay horse. At the table, Mr. Garner offered to send some one to take us to ride in a car. That was in 1911. He sent Bill."
"And I sold a Buick and bought me a wife, the best day's business I ever did," rejoined Bill. "I took an Oakland first, but the boss told me to sell the Buick, if possible. So I loosened a spark plug, and that Oakland skipped and bucked worse than a mule. So they fell for the Buick. The price was $1,750, and Mrs. Burns sold three of her best horses and gave me a check.
"The next problem was to get some one to teach all those good looking girls to drive. After a week, I told the boss they were the bone-headedest crowd I had ever seen, and it would take me at least another week. You know the rest. We went to the Methodist parsonage one hot afternoon, July 13, 1913, and the knot was tied. We moved all our possessions - a forty-dollar wood stove, an electric iron, and a cow to our little brown house, which wasn't paid for, of course. But we both worked mighty hard and saved every penny. Ruth, you remember the first car we bought? Paid ten dollars for it, an old Busch. And, while you held the lantern, I overhauled it at night and sold it for sixty dollars.
"How long have I been interested in machinery? Ever since I can remember. I used to collect tin cans, pieces of iron, old plows and hoss, and everything I could find and build ginhouses and sawmills, with real honest-to-goodness smokestacks and boilers. It's a wonder I hadn't got blowed up or burnt up.
"I grew tired of working for the other fellow and wanted to work for myself, so I rented a storeroom for a hundred and twenty-five dollars a month and paid in advance. When I was cleaning it up, I got a blister on this right hand. Infection. I was laid up for six weeks or more. Then soon as I got to work again, the war was on, and it looked like I'd be put in the second class and shot straight to France. But I got forth class and never was called.
"Prices shot up, and we made some money. I remember one day Ruth came to the shop and said, 'Bill, I want four hundred dollars.' I thought she had lost her mind. But I happened to have it in the bank, and, of course, she went home with a check. Later, I was discussing buying a $10,000-lot, and she said, 'I can furnish $7,000 of it.' This time, I knew she had lost her mind. But I be-dog if she didn't fish it out of bank, mattresses, and every crack and crevice till she counted the amount. Taught me a valuable lesson in saving, too. Then we mortgaged the little brown house for $2,750 and made the first payment on this one. That was Friday, the 13th of February, and we moved in on Friday, the 13th of March."
"Are you folks just plain superstitious or good Presbytsrians and believe in predestination?" I asked.
"Both, I guess. Bill's been a deacon in our church for ten years, and the rest of us try to be good as we can," Mrs. McAlister said, as she laughed.
"The secrst of my success, if I've had any," Bill McAlister told us, as he lit another cigarette, "lies in the fact that I try to be thoroughly honest in all my dealings with people. Then the volume of business I do, I think, has something to do with it. I employ eleven men, and we're all kept busy all the time, day and night, if we're needed. I am out a lot of the time, appraising and adjusting insurance premiums on wrecked cars, for which I am paid twenty-five dollars a day.
"I had a thrilling experience several years ago. A man's car fell over an embankment into water a hundred feet deep. A week passed, and nobody had located it. The owner wired from Charleston for a dive and his assistant, and we went to pull it out for him. Soon as I reached the place, I noticed bubbles of oil coming up every now and then on the water. Right away I said, 'That's where you'll find the car.' We rowed to the spot, and the diver went down. He telephoned, 'Buick. Cable tied securely to car. Coming up.' We pulled her out. and I repaired the car for a hundred and seventy-five dollars.
"But I think if I had my life to live over, I'd go in for professional athletics. Those fellows make a lot of money. When I was married, I had in my pocket a signed registration certificate to go into automobile racing, at a salary of one hundred dollars a race. But this little lady put an end to that, in short order. And I'm glad she did, for that's dangerous business, I'm telling you. Then I raced boats for a time. Now that's a thing that thrills. But I had one experience that came so near being serious. I promised my wife and the children I wouldn't go in any more, even for a $500 prise. But I haven't quit loving adventure. And neither have I quit loving a good joke and a hearty laugh.
"Several years ago, on a night about like this one, when ghosts walk around and spooks are behind every bush, Manigault, the Negro embllmer, called me about 11.00 o'clock.
"'Mr. McAlister, I've got a hearse stuck in the Wateroe swamp. They went over to Sumter to take a dead nan, and can't pull out. I want you to go after him. Can you go right away?'
"'Oh, yes, Manigault. I think I can get him out all right. Fact is, I will get him out. But I will be glad if you'll send a man over to go with me, if you've got one round there.'
"'Boss, you ain't scared to go by yourself, are you?"
"'No, Manigault. I thought you knew I wasn't scared of the devil, much less ghosts. But it's been raining mighty hard, and I understand that swamp'a in mighty bad condition. So I think I may need some help.'
"'Oh, all right, sir, I got a man here, and I'll send him right over.'
"So we got started pretty soon. We saw tha hearse about ten miles from Columbia, and all lights were still burning. I couldn't resist having some fun; so I said, 'George, drive the truck quietly as you can right on by the hearse, we've got to turn around anyway.' When we were some distance beyond, I told him, 'Now you go up to the hearse, I'll go with you, and you shake it as hard as you can, saying in a deep, hoarse voice, 'This is Mike. 'This is Mike. I done come back to life. I done come back to life. Let me in.'
"There were two Negroes in tha hearse, and they were both fast asleep. The little Negro went straight through the glass doors, without even a broken skin, and was followed by the big one. They both ran through mud, jumped over logs, and straight through puddles of water. Whan we did finally stop them, they were at least a quarter of a mile away. Scared? My soul, I never saw anybody so scased. I thought we'd never get'em quiet enough to drive the hearse back to Columbia. Fact is, George had to ride back with 'em."
SOUTH CAROLINO WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	NO, I'M NOT LONESOMS
Date of First Writing	December 1, 1938
Name of Persons Interviewed	Mrs. Fannie Miles (white)
Fictitious Name	Mrs. Mary Moore
Street Address	815 Gibbes Street (Olympia Mills)
Place	Columbia, South Carolina
Occupation	Textile Worker
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Get down off the lady's lap, Dickie," Mrs. Moore commanded the fox terrier. "Dickie's my pet," she explained in defense of his conduct. "He's the only company I have all day till four o'clock, when Polly comes in from work. We're maha all plumb crasy about him, and When he's clean he's so purty, white all over with teeny black dots. He's dirty now with smoke and dust. Come over hers and lay down by me, Dickie.
"I useter not mind staying by myself, but since I can't see to saw or read or do anything much, the days seem, mighty long to me. I have indigestion spells. The doctor says it's my nerves. He give me this box of pills and this bottle of medicine. But they ain't doin' me a speck o' good, and they cost three dollars, too. Sometimes I lie here all night by myself and wonder if I'll be alive Whan they got up in the morning.
"I lost my eye two years ago. Doctor says it's cataracts and glaucoma. I had to stay in the hospital three weeks, but my doctor didn't charge me a cent. I can still see a little out of my left eye, but every day the speak of light gets smaller and smaller. I'm fifty-eight years old, though, and I guess it's about tine my old body was wearing out. Don't you reckon it is?
"I can't do much but sit here all day long and think about my past life. Us children used to have a good time when we lived on the farm in North Carolina. There were ten of us, and we didn't get no education hardly. But we had a blue-back speller, and we used to look at the pictures in that.
"We always had plenty to cat, but nothing else, much. We had rabbits and chickens and eggs and fish. We caught the fish out of a little stream right close the house. My mother and father done the field work, and we had to do the house work and the cooking. My father hated to plow the garden, but Ma always saw to it that we had plenty of vegetables. How we hated to have to hoe those cabbages and beans and potatoes.
"I was just nine years old when we moved to a cotton will in Darlington, South Carolina, and I started to work In the still. I was in a world of strangers. I didn't know a soul. The first morning I was to start work. I remember coming downstairs foelin' strange and lonesome-like. My grand-father, who had a long, white board, grabbed me in his arms and put two one-dollar bills in my hand. He said, 'Take these to your mother and tell her to buy you some pretty dresses and make 'em nice for you to wear in this mill.' I was mighty proud of that.
"I worked three weeks learning to weave, and then they paid me twenty-five cents a day. That was big money to me. Course, when I learned to weave good, I got twenty-five dollars a week.
"John was the only sweetheart I ever had. He was older than me and drank whiskey: so my parents didn't must us to get married. But when I was twenty, me and him run away. One Saturday evenin' we went to the court-house and got married. Then we went on the train to Newberry. And Monday mornin' we both started to work in one of the mills. We come to Columbia after three months, and my mother was real glad to see me again. We started housekeeping, but we couldn't save any money. We moved about too much.
"For twelve years we moved from pillar to post. We lived in Augusta, and six different towns in South Carolina. Those days you could get a job anywhere at one dollar and ten cents a day. But our money all went in moving. I certainly think it was mighty bad. John couldn't see an inch frm his nose, and I told him he went backwards 'stead of forwards. Some places he done well, if he had only let well enough alone. But he always thought there was somethin' better ahead. He was a pretty good sort of a man, too, just thought he knowed it all. His worst habit was gambling. Sometimes he'd win a little, and then he'd lose more'n ho'd won. When Jack was a baby, I decided I just couldn't keep draggin' the children around. So John got to where he'd go off without me. Sometimes he'd sond money to help us along and sometimes he wouldn't. Finally he quit comin' home at all. I worked, and the children soon got big emough to work some.
"LeRoy was the oldest, and the first work he done was to dalivar packages for the mill drug store. He was a smart child and kept working his way up till he was making a good salary at Bryan's Printin' Office. We wuz livin' purty good then, till LeRoy got killed in an automobile accident. Two cars come togother one night and LeRoy was throwed out against the sidewalk. He died right away. Never even lived to get back home. It nearly killed me and Polly, the way he got killed and all. That left me with two little children, Polly and Jack, and nobody to help me support them.
"Polly got married the first time when she was just sixteen. Married a man from Illinois. He had been in the Navy four years. I begged her not to marry a plumb stranger like that, but she just would do it. You know how young people are. Well, sir, he surprised us all. He learned to run a section in the mill, and he and Polly came right here to live with me. They paid me six dollars apiece for board every week. And if I ran short of money, he'd give me his whole check. He shore was good to me. One night, after he'd been here about six years, he went away, without a soul knowing a thing about it. And we never heard a word from him till a telegram came from his aunt, saying he had died in Arkana, Texas.
"After he left, Polly learned he had posed as a single man, you understand, and had been run out of town by the father of the girl he had been going with. When the baby come, everybody said it looked exactly like Bill, and it did. I went to see for myself.
"Polly hated that thing for a while. But long before she heard he was dead, she had another beau and was doing some heavy sporting. As soon as she heard Bill was dead, she got married to Robert Smith. He's a carpenter and nakes about $15 a week. Polly works in the mill and makes $12.50. So they make a very good living.
"They came right here to live, and both of them is good to me. Polly comes in from work on dark, rainy days and comes straight to me and kisses me. She says: 'Mother, I know you've been lonesome here all day by yourself. I've been thinking about you all day long.' But I say to her to keep her from worrying about me, 'Why, Polly, I'm not lonesome. Why do you think I'm lonesome? Don't I have the radio to keep me company? I've had a good time here all by myself. I'm only thankful I don't have to go out in the cold and rain.'
"They have a V-S coupe and take me to ride lots. I can't see much now, and I'm awful nervous. But I don't say a word to them about it. They go to the movies about once a week, and they like to play rummy and smut. They both like to read, especially on long winter nights. They had one book called 'Gone With the Wind,' and they read through and through that one.
"I bog 'em to save some money to build 'em a house with, so they won't be always moving like we done. But they won't save much. They want a home, and I think they want some children, too. Polly didn't want any before. She was young and wanted to have a good time. But she'd be glad now.
"Jack don't throw away his money, I'm telling you. We're sure proud of him. And he ain't had half a chance, neither. When his father gambled all his money away and stopped sending us any, Jack quit school, and him only thirteen years old. It was a shame, but he wasn't doing much good in school anyway. So he got him a job in the mill, sweeping. He made one dollar a day, and that helped support the family. That summer, Jack said he learned what hard work was like. And it wasn't long till he felt like he wanted some more education, and he couldn't think of nothin' else. But he couldn't stop work, it looked like. So, when he heard about a night school they was having over at the Olympia schoolhouse, he decided to try it. For four years, he worked all day and studied at night. His teachers helped him powerful all along. By that time, he was doffing in the mill and makin' thirteen dollars a week. He saved every cent of it, too, except what he paid for his books and clothes. He paid me six dollars a week board, and that was a help to me. Then a friend told him about this Textile Industrial Institute, in Spartanburg. If he'd go there, he could study two weeks an' work two. He decided to try this. They took his money for his expenses out of his check. He stayed there three years, and they tell me he done mighty well. He'd come home in the summertime and go right to work in the mill here. Then he went all along to Miss Wil Lou Gray's Opportunity School at Clemson College. Jack has written about that school and it's been in a book. Let me get it for you to road yourself what all he said about it."
In a two-page article from the Journal of Adult Education, written by Jack, he described the school as a college vacation school for those who have gone beyond the eight grade in public school, but who wish to keep on learning. "There I had four glorious weeks of college life  classes that were actually interesting, afternoons of play and work, evenings of study. My fellow pupils were eager to learn, and our teachers seemed to delight in sharing their knowledge and experience with us. I liked that school so much that I have gone back every year since  five years as a pupil and three years as a visitor or office helper. Self-reliance and individual and community improvemants are stressed in the Oppportunity School family. Such friendliness, courtesy, and straightforwardness prevail there that few go back to their communities and homes without having the watchwords of the school. 'Better eitizenship, and a better South Carclina,' stamped indelibly on their lives.'"
"Well, sir, it's just funny to me, but it seemed like the more he learned the more he wanted to learn. So he started right in at the University of South Carolina. He studied till eleven o'clock every night and got up at four o'clock every morning to deliver The State, a Columbia newspaper. And do you know I never had to call him a single time in them two years. Made all his expenses, too. Never owed a cent when he graduated. And he graduated with distinction, too. He still studies over there in the summers, working on another degree. Here's two modals he won, and he's got one on his watch chain. They're all so purty. I wish he'd wear all three of 'em, 'stend o' leavin' 'em shut up in this box for nobody to see. And do you know he's teaching English in the high school in Greenville? Somebody asked the head man in the school how he's getting on, and he said, 'Moore is the very best.' And I believe it, too.
"I can't talk proper. I make mistakes a plenty, but Jack has helped me lots. Some children make fun of their mothers. But Jack doesn't. He tells me about the way I talk and tries to help me in every way he can. Some children are so 'sasay' and give their mothers so much trouble. Jack has never been that way.
"We sure do miss Jack. He didn't come home for Thanksgiving. He wrote me a letter and said he had to save his money. But he's comin' Christmas. He sends me a check for eight dollars every month soon as he gets his money. He tells me to hire somebody to stay here with me, so I won't be so lonesome. But I'm getting on all right by myself yet. I buy me a quart of milk every day. Jack says I really need that. I've bought me some ovaltine and these nice now shoes you see I've got on and some other things I needed. I take a little snuff along. Jack and Polly tall me it's all right to do so, if it keeps me from being so lonesome. I save a little, too, and pay a little along to the church, though I can't go none hardly now. The children don't want me to go out much. We all belong to the Whaley Methodist Church. Jack was the youngest member ever served on the Board of Stewards in our church. I wish I had enough money to buy Miss Wil Lou Gray and my doctor something real nice for Christmas.
"I made Miss Gray a tulip quilt when I could see good. I thought it wasn't good enough to send her, but Jack said, 'Mother, Miss Gray will like anything you send her. You don't know how she is.' And so I let him take it 'round there. I'm certainly glad she liked it. I'm saving one of my prettiest begonias for her Christmas present and one for my doctor who was so good to me. Jack owes all he is to Miss Gray. Not long ago he wrote me, 'If it were not for you, Mother, I'd say Miss Gray is the best woman in the world.'
"Polly's fixed up the living room nice, and it's to be Jack's room all by himself now. She's put all his books in here, too. These fine ourtains with blue balls on the edge ain't now, but Polly borrowed some stretchers and fixed 'em up nice.
"We like our little home here. Several years ago, that was a lovely little park and playground across the street, with that little branch running sp cool and sweet through it. My children played over there, and I always felt that they were safe when they were in the park. But people abuse everything, don't they? Young couples began to stay there late nights, and the first thing we knew, the company just let the park grow up in weeds. But we are glad not to have houses in that space. We don't feel so cooped up. I do wish the railroad company hadn't put that big fill right to the left of our house.
"It was a wonderful sight when my hydrangeas and zinnias and everything was in bloon, and my roses on the fence. You see all this shrubbery? Jack rooted it every bit from limbs he'd get at the university and from all about wherever anybody would give him a piece. He can root anything, and it grows so nice. I stuck these out. Thought I'd try my hand since Jack is gone. I love the sunshine. Ain't it grand to sit out in it? I sure have enjoyed having you come to see me."
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: A DAY WITH THE PATTONS
Date of First Writing	January 9, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Mr. Rob Pagett (white)
Fictitious Name	Bert Patton
Street Address	None
Place	Lykesland, South Carolina
Occupation	Rural Mail Carrier and Farmer
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
A happy setting of circumstances caused me to be included among the guests of the Patton family one glorious Sunday in January. Their home, some seven miles east of Columbia, on State Highway number 76, is a sixroom bungalow painted green, with ivory trimmings. The avenue leading about the distance of a block from the highway to the house is bordered on both sides by peoan trees. About over the yard are large liveoaks interspersed with oedars. The house is bordered with shrubbery, and to the left is a large plot of perennial flowers.
Of the four members of this rural segment of the Patton family, Sadie, a rather low, well-rounded brunette, who never elected to marry, is the oldest. Martha, a tall, slender blonde, and also a spinster, is next in years. Bert, the head of the family, is of medium size and of dark complexion. He is some sixty years of age. Formerly, he was a mail carrier, but now, retired on a life annuity, he farms the fifty acres that belong to the place. He delayed marriage until two years ago, when he married Bobbee Bexter, a rural sweetheart twenty-two years old.
And the guests of that day were, besides the writer, a Columbia brother, Marvin, the oldest of all, and Olive, his wife. Adding to the pleasure of the day was the drive out from Columbia with Bert and Bobbee. The guest's car  well, it wasn't running that day. So Bert, true to form and character, came in and got us.
Miss Sadie met us on the portico to augment the kind invitation with her cordial welcome and to usher us into the glowing warmth of the living room, a cozy room, with oak logs burning in the brick fireplace. The furnishings were simple and tasteful. Over the mantel was a picture of Sir Galahad, done in sepia.
Miss Sadie, clad in a simple and becoming black dress, bubbled over with easy and charming animation as we circled about the fire. In the corner with the fire implements stood a sword-shaped piece of steel. "That was my father's sword," Miss Sadie explained in response to my eying it. "He carried it in the Confederate War for three years. Funny place for it, but Bert put it there to hold the piece of paper in place till it can be stuck back on the wall. The maid seems to have used it for a poker this morning, and I'll use it for one now. One of these days I'm going to polish it and send it to the relic room in Columbia. My father has a manuscript there. Just before he died - when he was seventy  he wrote notes on his soldier-boy experiences from memory. It was an interesting paper."
"And this, Bert added, as he opened a drawer of a nearby secretary, "is the pistol Dad carried in his pocket all three years."
"Listen, Son," exclaimed Marvin, "don't point the thing in this direction; turn it the other way. It's the unloaded gun that shoots and kills, you know."
"Yes, that's the reason I always keep mine loaded," Bert answered. "And I've never shot anybody yet."
"This piano is another one of our antiques," Miss Sadie said. "It's way over one hundred years old, and still has a sweet tone. When my mother was born, my grandmother died, and my mother went to live with a Revolutionary soldier, a major, from Lexington County. He bought this piano for my mother when she was just a child."
"Sadie, for goodness' sake, forget about antiques for a while," Marvin urged.
"I'm wondering, Mrs. Jones, if Bert pointed out to you any places of interest along the road as you came down," said Miss Sadie, in the desire for a new subject. "He talks so little and drives so fast, I bet he forgot to point out Heathwood on the left as you came out of the city. That's one of Columbia's beauty sports. Lovely homes and gardens."
"To begin with," put in Marvin, "you came out on the Garners Ferry Road. If you haven't grown hazy on your South Carolina history, you'll recall that it's one of the oldest roads in the State. It is a part of the old Statesborough-to-Columbia road. Years ago, stage coaches carried mail and passengers from Charleston to the interior over that road. It's a beautiful highway now, and in the spring, it's more lovely, with blooming plants and grass on both sides."
"The ruins of Millwood are visible from the road, too," Miss Sadie explained. "The columns stand like sentinels to remind folks, like Marvin, that South Carolinians are still proud of the Hamptons."
"That Veterans' Hospital is a handsome thing," Marvin continued, "When the Government first started it, I thought the committee was a set of darned fools to build as big a thing as that, but I be-dog if it isn't running over with patients all the time. They've got 545 there now. That's one of the prices we pay for war.
"Christine, Pete, and Susan ought to be here today," Marvin continued after a reflective moment, "so as to make the family unit complete. Somehow we're too busy these days to think much of family unity. Maybe we're just too confounded indifferent. Those were good old days when we all answered 'present' to the family roll call. Well, reminisoing is a sign I'm getting old, I guess."
As the writer later learned, Marvin is both the oldest boy of the family and a favorite. When he was six years old, he was laid low with typhoid fever. For days he lay emaciated and unconsoious, almost lifeless. A distant cousin came regularly in the evenings, after work was done, and he and Marvin's parents went into the living room to pray for the sick child. One night, after the prayer, he said, "Cousin Sallie, Marvin is going to get well." At midnight the crisis came, and the child began to improve. There was also a second serious illness. When a local physician lanced an abscess on Marvin's liver and held the incision open with a disinfected sharpened stick.
Bobbee came in to invite us into an adjoining room where a delicious dinner was served. Here Martha, previously busy with dinner details, joined our group. Bobbee, in response to various compliments on the dinner, especially addressed to her, remarked a bit deprecatingly, "Preparing a meal is no new experience to me. We had a big family and us girls took turns doing the work. We had lots of company. Huh, I was down home yesterday, and thirty-eight people were there for dinner. I've made a pretty good cook of Bert, too. We do everything together. You'd be surprised, though, how easy it is to get our meals. We raise most of our food right here on the farm. We have plenty of corn, hams, butter, milk, chickens, and eggs. We milk three cows now, and we raised a thousand biddies here in the yard last year. And we always have a good garden of vegetables, winter and summer.
"It's a mighty good thing we can have plenty close to hand, or in jars in the pantry. We never know when Bert's going to bring in carloads of folks to eat. Christmas day, when the table was all laid and dinner ready to serve, in came Bert with five little children whose mother had just died. They wouldn't of had much of a dinner, if Bert hadn't thought of them. Every now and then he picks up a load of children and takes them to Columbia to the Micky Mouse Club. Yes, it's open house here just like it is down home."
"No use to worry," the cynical Marvin retorted. "The President will feed you. I'm glad Congress has stopped some of this wild spending, for a while, anyway. He's thrown away millions of the people's money. Dad blame it all, I'm tired of it myself."
"Now, Marvin, go slow," admonished Miss Sadie. "I declare you've associated so much with that new millionaire son-in-law of yours and sold so many high-priced suits to rich people that you've learned to think their thoughts after them. Roosevelt's done lots of good and made things easier for poor floks. You must not 'speak evil of dignitaries,' you know."
"And, Sadie," said Martha, "you wouldn't speak evil of the devil himself, and you won't let any of us do it. You've always got some sort of an alibi. Did we hear the President's last speech? If it were broadcast, Sadie heard it. She's never missed a program since we had a radio. The other day she made a cake, put it in the stove, and sat down at the radio. She forgot all about the cake. And when I went to the kitchen to see what was burning, it was ruined, burnt to a crisp.
"Well, I don't see why a commonplace thing like a cake should interfere with a program of beautiful music like Nelson Eddy and Jeannette McDonald put on," Sadie rejoined.
The meal over, a Negro girl, black as the ace of spades, with ivory white teeth, whiter still because of the contrast, came in to clear the table of dishes. Instead of a maid's cap, she had a modern bird's nest hat perched on the left side of her head. "Miss Martha, I wants to git a envelofe to mail a letter wid  No'm I can't read nor write. I can pick out some letters in the paper, though How old I is? No'm, I don't know zactly, but I's 'bout fifteen. But I knows where I was borned, down in de old field Dick, yoy git outer my way. You'll mek me broke dese here dishes o' Miss Bobbee's No'm I ain't got no husband. Reckin I'd kill 'im of'n I had one, of'n he wouldn't treat me right Yessum, I got two children, but dey bof dead, though."
Miss Sadie explained Annie's position in the household by saying she comed in handy about bringing in wood, sweeping yards, and doing other heavy work about the place. "Sometimes we pay Annie, and sometimes we pay her to stay away. We try to keep her and Jack in clothes and shoes. We've just given her those new shoes she has on now. She and Jack were outcasts, and we took them for their sakes, rather than for ours. They both think the world of 'Cap'n Bert,' and of the rest of us, too, as for that. We couldn't be true to our tradition, if we'd mistreat the Negroes on the quarters. We're told that, after the war, our grandparents sold old treasured keepsakes, one by one, in order to keep an ex-slave comfortable. Then father and mother had lots of the 'milk of human kindness' and were always kind to the Negroes.
"Our parents were in their early twenties when the war closed. Father's education was cut short by the war, but mother graduated at the Columbia Female College in these days when it was still a question whether a woman had sense enough to warrant an education or not. My mother, accustomed to slaves all her life, had a hard time making adjustments. She has told us that, as a bride, she gave out a peck of flour for biscuits the first morning.
"My father owned a plantation in Fairfield County and carried my mother there as a bride. The lands were fertile. Everything in plant and animal life could be raised on it. The soenery was charming and varied. But there were rocks and hills galore, and farming was expensive. Father's other brothers had homes in Richland County, and they persuaded him to move near them. Some sort of an exchange was worked out between father and the farmer in Richland. I don't think any money was exchanged.
"Six of their twelve children, however, were born in Fairfield, and we older children started to school there. I can see the little old schoolhouse now down in the 25-acre pasture, so far from home that mother always sent a Negro nurse with us to protect us from the rams, bulls, and boars, should they become vicious. Other children came to the school, and the patrons paid the salaries of the teachers, who usually lived in the community.
"After we moved to Lykesland, father was delighted with his new place and soon became a pioneer in progressive methods of farming. He made terraces to prevent soil erosion, rotated his crops, and secured registered breeds of stock. and cattle. The task of rearing that big family must have been a staggering one to them. Mother was never very strong and always stayed in the background, interested in making a home rather than a living. But she was the source of inspiration and courage to the rest of us, the real power behind the throne. A prolonged illness, and she left us at the age of forty-five."
With the quick motion and easy grace that characterizes her every movement, Miss Sadie moved over to the build-in book shelves and returned with the family Bible. The covers were dog-cared and worn; the pages were ragged, misplaced, and yellow with age. "What a good time we children have had reading these Bible stories in the preface. Mother would make us wash our hands so clean they would bear inspection. Then she'd seat us in the middle of the floor, with this Bible in the midst of us. How we loved these stories with the colored illustrations. She was one woman who didn't think it was too holy for the children to enjoy." At the bottom of the page, where the important records of the family were kept, these words were scrawled in a child's handwriting "Victor colt born August 19, 1891 written by Pete."
"You know Pete's married? Oh, yes, he's been married six years. Married the head nurse at O'teen. That's the Federal TB sanatorium at Asheville, you know. Jane is a lovely girl. We're all very fond of her. For the two years that Pete was a patient and she his nurse, they were in love. They wrote each other every day, and occasionally Jane, accompanied by another nurse, would drop in to visit Pete during off hours. But the marriage was a complete surprise to everybody. At first, we thought it was very unwise, but Pete argued that if Jane were going to nurse TB patients all her life, she just as well nurse him, and both of them could have companionship and a home. Jane makes a good salary, about $150 and her board, and she takes excellent care of Pete. As attractive as ever? Well, we think so and there are frequent discussions among their friends as to which is the better looking, Pete or Marvin. Pete has tried raising chickens and hogs, but he has to go back to bed every time he exercises much, and he says he's writing a book now when he has to stay in bed. He's one of the many tragedies of the World War. He and Ned grew to be real friends."
"Ned? Who id Ned?" I asked while she carefully replaced the precious old book in its place on the shelf.
"Lawsy me, I thought I had told you about Ned. Didn't I ever tell you that Ned is sort of an adopted member of the family? You've seen our now brick personage? Several years ago, we were about to lose it because of a $600-debt; so we women decided to sell meals at the State Fair to make some money. We worked ourselves nearly to death, but we had lots of fun, and paid the $600-debt. This lad, Ned, took his meals with us, and he was such an attractive chap we all enjoyed him. A few days after the fair closed, in walked Ned one morning. 'You told me if I ever needed a friend, I could count on you,' he said. 'I've lost job. I want a friend; so I've come to you.'
"That was a problem. We didn't know what in the world to do with Ned. We had no guest room at that time, and Bert draw the line on sharing his room with this questionable stranger from Canada, who had been traveling with the aquaplane. But something had to be done. Ned had no clothes, no food, no money, no home. So we put up an extra bed on the back porch and made him welcome to all we had. When the first rain came a few days later, ye gods, the porch leaked so in the middle of the night that Ned couldn't stay out there at all; so Bert called him into his quarters. Bert never expresses any emotions, as you know, but we had observed with interest how Ned was growing in his favor. The whole family fell for Ned. Christine came for a visit. Christine is our oldest sister, Mrs. L. C. Carroll, at Winnsboro, you know. Well, she and Ned read French plays together. He followed Bert around like a shadow and helped with the work whenever he was needed. It was too funny to see him coming from the field one afternoon on the bare back of a mule, and the mule running as fast as she could. The mule ran straight to her stall, and Ned was throws, against a stump. We were petrified with fear. Ned lay lifeless; we were sure he had been killed. Finally Bert came in from his work, and we carried Ned into the house. After several days in bed, he was out again and seemed O. K. There were no bad effects.
"After about eight months, Ned said one day, 'Well, I got to go. I've got a brother somewhere and I got to go find him.' We shared what money we had with him, and Bert gave him some extra clothes and took him nearly to Camden."
The Pattons have always kept open house. Their father provided everything for the table in abundance, and their friends marveled that the "loaves an fishes" were always "multiplied" on Sundays to meet the needs of dozens of guests who went home with them from church.
During most of the day, Martha had sat quietly. She slipped from the room, and Marvin remarked, "She's gone now to see that everything has been done just right. She's worth her weight in gold. When she was a little thing, she used to tell us, 'I'm the chicken of the blue hen.'"
"Have you seen my swallow's nest?" Bert asked, as he carefully lifted a nest from the mantelpiece. "One day last summer, Sade heard an unusual noise here. Finally she located it in the fireplace. The nest had fallen from the chimney, and there were four babies in it. It seems to me to be a piece of perfect art. I never let anybody destroy a bird's nest on this place, so we put the little birds in a sparrow's nest under the eaves of the front porch. And do you know that sparrow fed then just like she did her own birdies?"
"Do the red birds and mocking birds still come to the front porch and sit on the backs of the rockers and sing?"
"Oh, yes. A mocking bird was there the last warm day we had."
"Bert, take 'em out in the yard to see your oats, dogs, and pigs," Mrs. Patton suggested. Bobbee shared her husband's interest in the pets, although she had been in the family only two years and was thirty-eight years younger than her more matured husband. It was she who told us about the calf that had been accidently out on a nail and how painstakingly they had cared for it till it was well; of her pet pig, a runt, that comes to her window, day or night, whenever she calls, "Honey, come on here." She also told of the six cats which had been taught to climb a ladder at the first sight of a new bulldog; about the three dogs that had thirty-six puppies at the same time and every one of them had to be killed because one of the mothers developed rabies; and of Mr. Woo, the very smartest dog she had ever seen. She had actually taught him to turn the electric light on and off.
"What's this thing that looks like a cage?" I asked.
"Oh, that's a pen I made for a hawk last spring," Bert replied. "The darned thing kept eating my red biddies, and I just had to shoot him. He fell with a broken wing. I got sorry, bound up his wing, and oared for him till he was well. I thought, of course, he'd be appreciative of the favor; but instead, he brought in all his friends and neighbors in the fall when they wanted delicacies, and I had to kill him after all.
"How long have I been keeping chickens? Ever since I can remember. We keep our reds here in this run and our white leghorns over yonder in the rear of the yard. We like eggs, and those leghorns keep us supplied. Haven't bought three dozen eggs in two years. I'd say we've sold $75 worth of chickens and eggs, together, and we eat chicken whenever we want it.
"Bert, let's show her our prize hogs," Bobbee insisted.
"This is the hen that lays our golden eggs," Bert said, as he showed us this fine hog. We keep her in a separate pen from the other hogs. She's Duroo Jersey, and was an unusual buy for five dollars. In three years. I've sold $450 worth of pigs, and the up-keep hasn't been so much.
"I'm not much of a cotton farmer. Fact is, I haven't been much interested in farming till the last few years. My job has been to carry the mail for Uncle Sam. When my mother died, our struggle began in earnest. She was ill for several years, and father kept borrowing a little money on the home place so he could make ends meet. The oldest child, Christine, had just finished Columbia Female College. She looked after housekeeping, cared for us children, and taught school over there at Smith's school. With her salary of $35 a month, she helped to send Marvin to Spartanburg for a business course, hoping he could help out with our finances. But his health failed, and for a year or more he was not able to work at all. Then we all struggled with the education of the other children, each one helping with every other one. My, we had a hard time."
"No such thing, Bert," said Miss Sadie. "We've always been happy. And sacrifice is part of the joy of having a big family and sharing with one another. It was no sacrifice for me to leave home and work as matron at Columbia Female College for two years, so that my salary of $50 a month might be applied to the education of the two younger children. And it was a pleasure for me to rent a house for $15 a month and take six boarders at $25 each, in order for Mary to get college training. Shucks, that's an interesting part of the game. I got a big thrill out of my part of the sacrifice, if that's what you want to call it."
"Well," Bert took up his story again. "I saw where things were headed; so when I had a chance at this small job, I took it. I was about twenty-five. At first, I had only eighteen miles, and my salary was $51. For a few years I used two horses. The roads wore terrible, and sometimes I had to get a mule to pull me out of the mud. When the roads improved and my route increased to thirty miles, I used a car. I've bought seventeen Chevrolets, and I believe my oar expense has been $400 a year. I reckon I've put $7,000 in these cars. But I was well paid - my salary went to $175 a month - and I should have saved money. There have been many and unusual demands on me, however. I've been retired five years now, at a salary of $96 a month. I consider Uncle Sam a pretty good fellow to work for.
"The loss of our home was a staggering blow to us all. Father died suddenly in 1915. The mortgage on the place kept growing with the years. The World War came on. Camp Jackson was being built, and labor want to six dollars a day, and we couldn't compete with that sort of price. Later, the boll weevil and the depression hit us. We had been offered $40,000 for the place, but when the showdown came, we couldn't raise the $15,000 we had borrowed on it, and so it had to go."
"Let's forgot it," Marvin said. "I've preyed day and night that I never could think of it again. It's the worst kind of nightmare to me." "And the saddest day of my life," Sadie added, "was when I left my home." And together they walked off in the direction of the barn.
"We moved over to the Brooks Place," Bert continued, "and Sadie nursed an old couple to help pay the rent. After three years, we tried another farm, hoping we could do better. In the meantime, the doctor found I had diabetes and other complications, and I've been on a strict diet ever since. He ordered rest in a hospital, but somebody in the family had to carry on, and I couldn't stop. We came here three years ago, I pay $350 rent and have 50 acres. I'm allowed to plant fifteen acres in cotton. Last year the boll weevil got all the cotton in this section. I only made six bales, and I usually make a bale to the acre. I doubt if we clear $10 per bale anyway; so I'm depending more and more on other things to supplement my salary and to pay for the privilege of planting a crop. I pay 70 cents a day for labor and own my stock and plows, and so forth.
"You have observed I haven't known anything much about the cost of things. We have never bothered with that side of it much; we've been too careless, I realize. But Bobbee is a good business woman, and together we're already working on a budget for this year. Come back a year from now, and I'll be well versed in these figures. The sunshine is not so warn now; maybe we had better go to the fire."
"What do you all know about Christine these days?" Marvin asked. "I've felt all day that they would drive up here this afternoon. I sold Mr. Connor a suit of clothes the other day, and he said neither of them is very well these days. He told me some kind of cock-and-bull story about their not coming up here any oftener. They are both crazy about those boys of J. W.'s. That's Christine's third family to raise, isn't it? After mother's death, she was a mother and a teacher to us children. When we got from under her wing, I guess, like Napoleon, she wanted another family to conquer; so she finally consented to worry Mr. Connor, and his seven children became her charge. Now, since J. W.'s death, she has these two grandchildren. My we could hardly live through the rearing of our four. She's done a good job, too. Out of the Connor children, she's made a distinguished Methodist preacher, a capable school superintendent, and two excellent school teachers. She entered the schoolroom for the second time and put her salary into their education. A darned good record for a stepmother. I'd say."
Miss Sadie then told us about Susan, who also married a widower. "She and Brother Saxon didn't get home for Christmas, but Susan sent me and Martha a lovely coat apiece. Susan hasn't lost her sense of humor, and it relieves many tense situations in that Methodist parsonage. Her sarcasm sometimes hurts the sensitive parishoners, I imagine; but she's charming and handsome, and Mr. Saxon is devoted to her. She and Mary were so congenial. Somehow none of us can get over Mary's untimely death."
"Before it gets any later, Bobbee, let's take the folks for a ride and show 'em the changes they're making in the road," our thoughtful host suggested. "This road will be a beauty when it's finished. Quite a difference between this one and the one I first rode the mail over."
"We're coming now to the church and to the place where we got our 'larning,' said Miss Sadie. An ancestor' of mother's gave this land and some gold money to build a Methodist church and a school near this creek. You see the new highway will divide the church from the cemetery. Some folks are disgruntled over that.
"When father first came to this community, the first Sunday we were here, dressed in our best bib an' tucker, we all came to this church. I recall we came, eight strong, in a double-seated open vehicle, driving a mule and a horse, Beck and Annie, with Annie's colt running along under the shaft."
"Excuse me, Sade," Marvin interrupted, "is that the Sunday I had to wear one of the girl's aprons which you turned 'round and buttoned in front for a shirt? I can see those buttons now, sewed all 'round the waist for me to fasten my pants to. No boy was ever so sinned against. I'll resent it till my dying day."
"Well, there wasn't anything else to do. You didn't have a clean one, Marvin, and you know as well as I do that there was no excuse father would accept for not going to church. I think you should congratulate us on our ingenuity.
"Father was made Sunday School superintendent that very day, and he held the position for twenty-five years. He was superintendent in Fairfield, and a steward in three churches. Brent has taken his place as steward in our church now. Father gave a lot of time to temperance work, also. Here's the Horrell Hill School where four children were killed in the tornado several years ago. There were, I think, about fifteen people killed in the community at the same time. This lovely new brick building took the place of the old one. Progress often follows in the wake of disaster."
"Now you can see what lovely broad acres lie along this road," Marvin remarked. Originally all these plantations were owned by father and his brothers and my wife's father end his brothers.
"I recall one year father made a bumper crop out here, without spending a cent for commercial fertilizer. These folks are near enough to Columbia to enjoy the good things the city has to offer, and they have telephones, electricity, and water. This highway will enhance the value of the property, too. Those folks have been offered $600 an acre for some of this land, but they are holding it for $1,000. Better take us home now, Bobbee. Bert can't stay away from home after dark."
We passed by the Negro quarters. Dick ran out to the road and said, "Cap'n Bert, whar you gwine? Lemme go wid you, Cep'n Bert. Us done fed up de mules an' de hawgs an' milked de cows. Lemme go wid you, please, sir."
"You can't go this time, Dick. Tell your daddy to look after things till I got back."
"This is the place where I beat my husband farming last year," Mrs. Patton said proudly. "He gave me an acre in here, and I made two bales on it. He didn't make but one on his best land. Right here below the Veterans Hospital is the place I've picked out for our new home. We don't want but ten acres either, with a brick bungalow on it. Oh, yes, we're working on the house plans. Haven't done anything else since Christmas. It may be only our dream house, but I am hoping not.
"When we have our own place, we're going to do truck farming. We plan to put out strawberries, raspberries, and dewberries the first year. Then gradually we'll get our peach and apple and pecan orchards planted; oh, yes, a vineyard, too. We'll have red chickens for food and white leghorns for laying eggs. That's as far as I'm going, but Bert says he's got to raise hogs and livestock. Of course, I'm expecting him to raise the food for everything we have. We hope the hospital will furnish a market for our produce, but if it doesn't, we'll have the curb market to fall back on, I believe it will beat planting cotton."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: THE GREATEST OF THESE IS CHARITY
Date of First Writing	January 9, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Mr. Rob Padgett (white)
Fictitious Name	Bert Patton
Street Address	None
Place	Lykesland, South Carolina
Occupation	Rural Mail Carrier and Farmer
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Well, I'll be darned; Sadie, what's this you're using for a fire poker this morning?" Marvin Patton asked, as the other guests circled about the oak logs burning in the brick fireplace.
"This if Father's sword he carried for three years in the Confederate War," his sister explained, while she stirred the coals with the piece of steel, "Haven't you ever seen it before? It is a funny place to have a sword. One of these days I'm going to polish it and send it to the relic room in Columbia. Father has a manuscript there, and it's an interesting paper, too. Notes on his soldier-boy experiences, written from memory when he was seventy."
"And this," Bert added, as he opened a drawer of a nearby secretary, "is the pistol Dad carried in his pocket all those years."
"Listen, Son," exclaimed Marvin, "don't point that thing in this direction; turn it the other way. It's the unloaded gun that shoots, you know."
"The piano is another one of our antiques," Miss Sadie said. "It's way over a hundred years old, but still has a sweet tone. It was bought for my mother when she was just a child."
"Sadie, for goodness sake, forget about antiques for a while," Marvin urged impatiently. "Christine, Pete, and Susan ought to be here today, so as to make the family unit complete. We're either too busy or too confounded indifferent these days to ever get the whole family together, it seems. Well, Bobbee, good morning. Dinner ready? And how are you, Bert, old boy? Glad to see you both."
"Mighty glad we could come. We stay pretty close round home since the children are so scattered."
At the table, in response to various compliments on the dinner, which were addressed especially to Bobbee, she remarked a bit deprecatingly, "Preparing a meal is no new experience to me. We had seven girls at home, and I'm telling you, Mother believed in that school of experience we hear about. Had lots o' company, too. I was down home yesterday, thirty-eight people there for dinner. But it's no trouble to get up our meals here. We raise most of our eats right here on the farm. We have plenty of corn, hams, butter, milk, chickens, and eggs. We milk three cows now, and we raised a thousand biddies right here on the yard last year. And we always have a good garden of vegetables, winter and summer.
"It's a good thing we have things close to hand, or in jars in the pantry. We never know when Bert's going to bring in a carload of folks to eat. Christmas day, when the table was all laid and dinner ready to serve, in came Bert with five little children whose mother had died. We just brought in extra tables and all ate at the same time. All the children around here think Bert belongs to them. And we like 'em to feel that way. Everybody who gets in trouble comes straight to Bert for help and he's never turned anybody away yet."
"We used to worry," Marvin retorted cynically, "but not any more. The President will feed you if you run out. I'm glad Congress has stopped some of this wild spending, for a while, at least. He's thrown away millions of the people's hard earned money. And he's always springing something new. Business men never know where they're at. Dad blame it all. I'm tired of it myself."
"Look here, Marvin, you're not supposed to speak evil of dignitaries," Miss Sadie admonished. "Roosevelt's dons lots o' good and made things a lot easier for poor people. I declare you've associated with that millionaire son-in-law of yours and sold so many high-prised suits to rich people that you've actually learned to think like they do."
"And Sadie," Bert commented, "wouldn't speak evil of the devil himself and won't let anybody else do it in her presence. Did we hear the President's last speech? If it were broadcast, Sadie heard it. She's never missed a program since we've had a radio. The other day she made a cake, put it in the stove, and turned on the radio. Bobbee smelt something burning, and, when she opened the stove door, the cake was burnt to a crisp."
"Pshaw! I don't see why so commonplace a thing as a cake should interfere with a program of beautiful music like Nelson Eddy and Jeanette McDonald put on," Sadie rejoined.
The meal over, a Negro girl, black as the ace of spades, with ivory white teeth, whiter still because of the contrast, came in to clear the table of dishes. Instead of a maid's cap, she had a modern bird's nest hat perched on the left side of her head. "Miss Martha, I wants to get a envelofe to mail a letter wid. No'm I can't read nor write. I can pick out some letters in the paper, though. How old I is? No'm I don't knew 'zactly, but I's 'bout fifteen. But I knows where I was borned, down in de old field. Dick, you git outer my way. You'll mek me broke dese here dishes o' Miss Bobbee's. No'm, I ain't got no husband. Reckin I'd kill 'im ef'n I had one. ef'n he wouldn't treat me right. Yessum, I got two chillun, but dey bof dead, though."
When Annie had left the room, Miss Sadie said, "Poor little old thing. She does come in heady for bringing in wood, sweeping yards, and doing other heavy work about the place. Sometimes we pay her, and sometimes we pay her to stay away. We try to keep her and Dick in clothes and shoes. We've just given her these new shoes she has on now. She and Dick were outcasts, and we took them for their sakes rather than for ours. They both think the world of "Cap'n Bert,' and of the rest of us, too, as for that. We couldn't be true to our tradition, if we'd mistreat the Negroes on the quarters. We're told that, after the war, our grandparents sold old treasured keepsakes, one by one, in order to keep an ex-slave comfortable. Then Father and Mother had lots of the 'milk of human kindness' and were always good to the Negroes.
"Our parents were in their early twenties when the war closed, Father's education was cut short by the war, but Mother graduated at the Columbia Female College, in those days when it was still a question whether a woman had sense enough to warrant an education or not. My mother, accustomed to slaves all her life, had a hard time making adjustments. She has told us that, as a bride, she gave out a peak of flour for biscuits the first morning.
"My father owned a plantation in Fairfield County and carried my mother there as a bride. The lands were fertile. Everything in plant and animal life could be raised on it. The scenery was charming and varied. But there were rocks and hills galore, and farming was expensive. Father's other brothers had homes in Richland County, and they persuaded him to move near them. Some sort of an exchange was worked out between father and the farmer in Richland, I don't think any money was exchanged.
"Six of their twelve children, however, were born in Fairfield, and we older children started to school there. I can see the little old schoolhouse now down in the 25-acre pasture, so far from home that mother always sent a Negro nurse with us to protest us from the rams, bulls, and boars, should they become vicious. Other children came to the school, and the patrons paid the small salaries of the teachers, who usually lived in the community.
"After we moved to Lykesland, Father was delighted with his new place and soon became a pioneer in progressive methods of farming. He made terraces to prevent soil erosion, rotated his crops, and secured registered breeds of stock and cattle. The task ef rearing that big family must have been a staggering one to them. Mother was never very strong and always stayed in the background, interacted in making a home rather than a living. But she was the source of inspiration and courage to the rest of us, the real power behind the throne. A prolonged illness, and she left us at the age of forty-five."
With the quick motion and easy grace that characterizes her every movement, Miss Sadie moved over to the built-in book shelves and returned with the family Bible. The covers were dog-eared and worn; the pages were ragged, misplaced, and yellow with age. "What a good time we children have had reading these Bible stories in the preface. Mother would make us wash our hands so clean they would bear inspection. Then she'd seat us in the middle of the floor, with this Bible in the midst of us. How we loved these stories with the colored illustrations. She was one woman who didn't think it was too holy for the children to enjoy." At the bottom of the page, where the important records of the family were kept, these words were scrawled in a child's handwriting: "Victor colt born August 19, 1891 written by Pete."
"You know Pete's married? Oh, yes, he's been married six years. Married the head nurse at O'teen. That's the Federal T.B. Sanatorium at Asheville, you know. Jane is a lovely girl. We're all very fond of her. For the two years that Pete was a patient and she his nurse, they were in love. They wrote each other every day, and occasionally Jane, accompanied by another nurse, would drop in to visit Pete during off hours. But the marriage was a complete surprise to everybody. At first, we thought it was very unwise, but Pete argued that if Jane were going to nurse T.B. patients all her life, she just as well nurse him, and both of them could have companionship and a home. Jane makes a good salary, about $150 and her board, and she takes excellent care of Pete. Is he as attractive as ever? Well, we think so, and there are frequent discussions among their friends as to which is the better looking, Pete or Marvin. Pete has tried raising chickens and hogs, but he has to go back to bed every time he exercises much, and he says he's writing a book now when he has to stay in bed. He's one of the many tragedies of the World War. He and Ned were such good friends.
"Who is Ned? Lawsy me, I thought I had told you about Ned," she said, as she carefully replaced the precious book in its place on the shelf. Didn't I ever tell you that Ned is sort of an adopted member of the family? You've seen our new brick parsonage? Several years ago, we were about to lose it because of a six-hundred-dollar debt; so we woman decided to sell meals at the State Fair to make some money. We worked ourselves nearly to death, but we had lots of fun, and paid the six-hundred-dollar debt. This lad, Ned, took his meals with us, and he was such an attractive chap we all enjoyed him. A few days after the Fair closed, in walked Ned one morning. 'You told as if I ever needed a friend, I could count on you,' he said. 'I've lost my job. I want a friend; so I've come to you.'
"That was a different problem from any we had ever had before. We didn't know what in the world to do with Ned. We had no guest room at that time, and Bert drew the line on sharing his room with this questionable stranger from Canada, who had been traveling with the aquaplane. But something had to be done. Ned had no clothes, no food, no money, no home. So we put an extra bed on the back porch and made his welcome to all we had.
"When the first rain came a few days later, ye gods, the porch leaked so in the middle of the night that Ned couldn't stay out there at all so Bert called him into his quarters. Bert never espressos any emotions, as you know, but we had observed with interest how Ned was growing in his favor. The whole family fell for Ned. Christine came for a visit. Christine is our oldest sister, Mrs. L. C. Carroll, at Winnsboro, you know. Well, she and Ned read French plays together. He followed Bert around like a shadow and helped with the work whenever he was needed. It was too fumy to see him coming from the field one afternoon on the bare of a mule, and the mule running as fast as she could. The mule ran straight to her stall, and Ned was throw against a stump. We were petrified with fear. Ned lay lifeless; we were sure he had been killed. Finally, Bert came in from his work, and we carried Ned into the house. After several days in bed, he was out again and seemed O.K.
"After about eight months, Ned said one day, 'Well, I got to go. I've got a brother somewhere and I got to go find him.' We shared what money we had with him, and Bert gave him some extra clothes and took him nearly to Camden. We often wonder what became of Ned."
During most of the day, Martha had sat quietly. She slipped from the room, and Marvin remarked. "She's gone now to see that everything has been done just right. She's worth her weight in gold. When she was a little thing, she used to tell us, 'I'm the chicken of the blue hen.'"
"Look, Bert, there's a mocking bird right there on the beak of that green rocker, and he's singing, tool" Bobbee exclaimed. "Sh-h-h let's be quiet. There were two red birds there last week. Ain't that too sweet for anything?"
"This in my swallow's nest," Bert said, as he carefully lifted a nest from the mantelpiece. "There were four babies in it when Sade found it on the hearth last summer. I put them in a sparrow's nest, and I be-dog if she didn't food 'em just like they were her on babies. Let's take the folks in the back yard to see the cats and dogs and pigs, Bobbee."
"Honey, come on here," Bobbee called, and her pet pig come running. "He'll come to my window at midnight, if I call him, Bert gave him to me because he's a runt. But the thing I'm proud of is that calf running out there. She out her neck on a nail about six weeks ago, and we've had a time keeping out infection. It's healed good now, though. Bert, call the cats and make 'em climb the ladder. That's just fine; where's the other one? Kitty! There they go. Now you can't make 'em come dawn till Joe leaves."
"We named Bull for Joe Louis," Bert said. "We had three dogs once, and altogether they had thirty-six puppies. I be-dog if I didn't have to kill every darned one of 'em because one of the mother's developed rabies, and I was afraid the last one of 'em would go mad."
"But, Bert, the very sweetest and smartest dog I've ever seen was Mr. Woo. You remember he'd turn the electric light on and off. Geewhiz he was a wonder."
"That's a pen I made for a hawk last spring," Bert said. The darn thing kept eating my red biddies, and I just had to shoot him. He fell with a broken wing. Then I got sorry, bound up his wing, and cared for him till he was well. I thought, of course, he'd be appreciative of the favors; but instead, he brought in all his friends and neighbors in the fall when they wanted delicacies, and I had to kill him after all.
"How long have I been keeping chickens? Ever since I can remember. We keep our reds here in this run and our white leghorns over yonder in the rear of the yard. We like eggs, and those leghorns keep us supplied. Haven't bought three dozen eggs in two years. I'd say we've sold seventy-fire dollars worth of chickens and eggs, together, and we eat chicken whenever we want it."
"Bert, let's show her our prize hogs," Bobbee insisted.
"This is the hen that lays our golden eggs," Bert said. "We keep her in a separate pen from the other hogs. She's Duroc Jersey, and was an unusual buy for five dollars. In three years, I've sold $450 worth of pigs, and the upkeep hasn't been so much.
"I'm not much of a cotton farmer. Fact is, I haven't been much interested in farming till the last few years. My job has been to carry the mail for Uncle Sam. When my mother died, our struggle began in earnest. She was ill for several years, and Father kept borrowing a little money on the home place so he could make ends meet. The oldest child, Christine, had just finished Columbia Female College. She looked after the housekeeping, cared for us children, and taught school over there at Smith's school. With her salary of $35 a month, she helped to send Marvin to Spartanburg for a business course, hoping he could help out with our finances. But his health failed, end for a year or more he was not able to work at all. Then we all struggled with the education of the other children, each one helping with every other one. My Lord, we had a hard time."
"No such thing, Bert," said Miss Sadie. "We've always been happy. And sacrifice is a part of the joy of having a big family and sharing with one another. It was no sacrifice for me to leave home and work as matron at Columbia Female College for two years, so that my salary of $50 a month might be applied to the education of the two younger children. And it was a pleasure for me to rent a house for $15 a month and take six boarders at $25 each, in order for Mary to get college training. Shucks, that's an interesting part of the game. I got a big thrill but of my part of the sacrifice, if that's what you want to call it."
"Well," Bert took up his story again, "I saw where things were headed; so when I had a chance at this job, of carrying the mail, I took it. I was about twenty-five. At first, I had only eighteen miles, and my salary was $51. For a few years I used two horses. The roads were terrible, and sometimes I had to get a mule to pull me out of the mud. When the roads improved and my route increased to thirty miles, I used a car. I've bought seventeen Chevrolets, and I believe my car expense has been $400 a year. I reckon I've put $7,000 in these cars. But I was well paid - my salary went to $175 a month - and I should have saved money. But there have been many and unusual demands on me. I've been retired five years now, at a salary of $96 a month. I consider Uncle Sam a pretty good fellow to work for.
"The loss of our home was a staggering blow to us all. Father died suddenly in 1915. The mortgage on the place kept growing with the years. The World War came on. Camp Jackson was being built, and labor went to six dollars a day, and we couldn't compete with that sort of pries, later, the boll weevil and the depression hit us. We had been offered $40,000 for the place, but when the showdown came, we couldn't raise the $15,000 we had borrowed on it, and so it had to go."
"Let's forget it," Marvin said, "I've prayed day and night that I never could think of it again. It's the worst kind of nightmare to me." "And the saddest day of my life," Sadie added, "was when I left my home." And together they walked off in the direction of the barn.
"We moved over to the Brooke Place," Bert continued, "and Sadie nursed an old couple to help pay the rent. After three years, we tried another farm, hoping we could do better. In the meantime, the doctor found I had diabetes and other complications, and I've been on a strict dist ever since. He ordered rest in a hospital. But somebody in the family had to carry on, and I couldn't stop. We came here three years age. I pay $350 rent and have 50 acres. I'm allowed to plant fifteen acres in cotton. Last year the boll weevil got all the cotton in this section. I only made six bales, and I usually make a bale to the acre. I doubt if we clear $10 per bale anyway; so I'm depending more and more on other things to supply my salary and to pay for the privilege of planting a crop. I pay 70 cents a day for labor and own my stock and plows, and so forth.
"You have observed I haven't known anything much about the cost of things. We have never bothered with that side of it much; we've been too careless, I realize. But Bobbee is a good business woman, and together we're already working on a budget for this year. Come back a year from now, and I'll be well versed in these figures. The sunshine is not so warm now; maybe we had better go to the fire."
"What do you all know about Christine these days?" Marvin asked. "I've felt all day that they might drive up here this afternoon. I sold Mr. Connor a suit of clothes the other day, and he said neither of them is very well these days. He told me some kind of cock-and-bull story about their not coming up here any oftener. They are both crazy about those boys of J.W.'s. That's Christine's third family to raise, isn't it? After Mother's death, she was a mother and a teacher to us children. When we got from under her wing, I guess, like Napoleon, she wanted another family to conquer; so she finally consented to marry Mr. Connor, and his seven children became her charge. Now, since J.W.'s death, she has these tow grandchildren. Sakes alive, we could hardly live through the rearing of our four. She's done a good job, too. Out of the Conner children, she's made a distinguished Methodist preacher, a capable school superintendent, and two excellent school teachers. She entered the schoolroom for the second time and put her salary into their education. A darned good record for a stepmother, I'd say.
"Susan married a widower, too. She and Brother Saxon didn't get home for Christmas, but Susan sent me and Martha a lovely coat apiece. Susan hasn't lost her sense of humor, and it relieves many tense situations in that Methodist parsonage. He sarcasm sometimes hurts the sensitive parishoners, I imagine; but she's charming and handsome, and Mr. Saxon is devoted to her. She and Mary were so congenial. Somehow none of us can get over Mary's untimely death.
"Mother always had a sort of feeling that Marvin was spared for a purpose. When he was six years old, he had an awful case of typhoid fever. For days we thought he'd die. Cousin Frank was a mighty good man, and every night, after plowing all day, he'd come over home and he and my parents would go in the living room to pray for Marvin. One night, after the prayer, he said, 'Cousin Sallie, Marvin is going to get well. I feel our prayer is answered.' That very night about 12 o'clock the crisis came, and Marvin improved from then on. A few years later, he was seriously ill again. The doctor made an incision and lanced an abscess on his liver. He sharpened a stick, disinfected it, and held the incision open with it. Mighty risky we'd think this day and time.
"When Father first came to this community, the first Sunday we were here, dressed in our best bib an' tucker, we all came to this church. I recall we came, eight strong, in a double-seated open vehicle, driving a mule and a horse, Book and Annie, with Annie's colt running along under the shaft."
"Excuse me, Sade," Marvin interrupted, "is that the Sunday I had to wear one of the girl's aprons which you turned round and buttoned in front for a shirt? I can see those buttons now, sewed all round the waist for me to fasten my pants to. No boy was ever so sinned against. I'll resent it till my dying day."
"Well, there wasn't anything else to do, Marvin. You didn't have a clean one, and you know as well as I do that there was no excuse Father would accept for not going to church. I think you should congratulate us on our ingenuity instead of blaming us.
"Father was made Sunday School superintendent that very day, and he held the position for twenty-five years. He was superintendent in Fairfield, and a steward in three churches. Bert has taken his place as steward in our church now. Father gave a lot of time to temperance work, too."
"Now you can see what lovely bread acres lie along this road," Marvin remarked. "Originally all these plantations were owned by Father and his brothers and my wife's father and his brothers.
"I recall one year Father made a bumper crop out here without spending a cent for commercial fertilizer. This highway will enhance the value of the property, too. These folks have been offered six hundred dollars an acre for some of this land, but they are holding it for $1,000. Better take us home now, Bobbee. Bert can't stay away from home after dark."
We passed by the Negro quarters. Dick ran out to the road and said, "Cap'n Bert, whar you gwine? Lemme go wid you, Cap'n Bert. Us done fed up de miles an' de hawgs an' milked do cows. Lemme go wid you, please, sir."
"You can't go this time, Dick. Tell your daddy to look after things till I get back."
"This is the place where I beat my husband faming last year," Mrs. Patton said proudly. "He gave me an acre in here, and I made two bales on it. He didn't make but one on his best land. Right here below the Veterans' Hospital is the place I've picked out for our new home. We don't want but ten acres either, with a brick bungalow on it. Oh, yes, we're working on the house plans. Haven't done anything else since Christmas. It may be only our dream house, but I am hoping not.
"When we have our own place, we're going to do truck farming. We plan to put cut strawberries, raspberries, and dewberries the first year. Then gradually we'll get our poach and apple and pecan orchards planted; oh, yes, a vineyard, too. We'll have red chickens for food and white leghorns for laying eggs. That's as far as I'm going, but Bert says he's got to raise hogs and livestock. Of course, I'm expecting him to raise the food for everything we have. We hope the hospital will furnish a market for our produce, but if it doesn't we'll have the curb market to fall back on, I believe it will beat planting cotton all to pieces."
There are two versions of the following interview which are substantially different in content and/or format. Therefore both versions have been included in the project.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: DARING THE DEVIL
Date of First Writing	January 16, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Reverend T.A. Snyder (white)
Fictitious Name	William Wiley
Street Address	Second Avenue
Place	West Columbia, S.C.
Occupation	Baptist Preacher
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
"Well, I declare, if it isn't Mrs. Jones. Come right in," said Mr. Wiley, a tall, erect, frail-looking man of about fifty years of age. "It's a lovely day to be gadding around, isn't it? Let me see." And his thoughts came fast, as he pandered just where we should sit, "I know, we'll go to the kitchen. Mrs. Wiley and a bunch of woman are having sons sort of a meeting in the study where we always sit, and I think the kitchen is still warm. Honestly, you won't mind a bit?
You'll please excuse me for meeting you in my shirt sleeves and without a collar and tie. I was just fixing to shave when the doorbell rang," Mr. Wiley continued, as he informally took his coat from the back of a chair and put it on.
As a short, plump, teen-age girl, with a lovely complexion, soft brown eyes, and wavy brown hair passed through the hall, she called, "Daddy, the telephone."
"Yes, I'm going in about an hour," we heard this pastor say to the parishioner. "Glad to have you and Mrs. Smith go with me. I'll be by for you about four o'clock. Good-bye."
When he was seated again, he explained, "That was Mabel, our second daughter, and she's a whole team, a regular chip off the old block, I declare.
"Lord, woman, you don't want to know nothing about this crowd. You better go find somebody who's done something. You see we were tarheels. I was born in Rutherfordton, North Carolina, back in 1890. My father owned a 200 acre farm there. He taught school when he wasn't busy with the farm work. Taught the three R's, you know. Those were blue-back speller days. He started me off in that good old book we hear so much about, but I didn't get to 'baker'. My mother had only a common school education.
"Farming in those days was a pretty up-hill sort of business, and making a decent living for eight children wasn't so easy. So my father wasn't making ends meet, and he gave a little mortgage on the farm. Finally he decided he could do better if he moved to a cotton mill and let the farm go. So we moved to Henrietta, North Carolina. That was thirty-five years ago.
"I began work in the mill when I was about fourteen years old. I earned twenty cents a day. Yes, ma'am, twenty cents. My mother wove, spun, and made the cloth, and then she made the pants for us boys. The old loom is in the attic in my sister's home now, where my father lives.
"But mill folks just won't stay put. We moved down to Lockhart, South Carolina, and I earned sixty cents a day there, doffing. I guess I made as much as twelve dollars a week before I left the mill."
As he stroked his gray hair, which fairly stood on end, he said, "My daughter has just washed my hair. No, you missed the guess, no beauty parlor. Hannah has bad eyes and likes to do things like that because they don't require close vision. When she was only two years old, she accidentally fell down two flights of stairs. Oh, it was awful. Her optic nerve was completely shattered. She has been totally blind several times and has had three hospital experiences. Oh, yes, she finished high school, thanks to Dr. Harden. I declare I can never forget Doc. He was so interested in the case and watched her with so much concern. Saw her regularly every week and assured us if he found study was against her, he'd let us know. She managed to get through, though, and is a grand girl.
"There the ladies go now. They finished their work in a jiffy. I bet their gossip is marked 'to be continued,' though. Let's move over to the study now; it will be more comfortable, I'm sure."
Mabel came blustering into the room about the same time, and, throwing her books on the table with a bang, stood before the mirror combing her hair and applying lipstick. After an exchange of greetings, she said in a sort of soliloquy: "Boy friends? You should see my latest. He's six feet three inches. We look like Mutt and Jeff. Do I like school? Yeah, crazy 'bout the holidays? What am I going to do when I finish? Nothing, like the rest of the family." And she exchanged understanding glances with her father, who replied in an undertone, "Lord, it there no balm in Gilead?"
"If you want to know about our family tree," Mabel continued, "I can tell you the limbs are all dead. Don't see why you didn't come on a Sunday. we're all dressed up that day and look a little better. You want to know if we're struggling. We just are, though. Been struggling indefinitely, and we're about to have to end it all now. I've got to go study for those old exams. Gee, but I hate 'em."
Mr. Wiley moved over nearer to the stove and resumed his story, "I haven't told you about my job experiences. I was making the climb to the hill to which we all go sooner or later, when I was about sixteen years old. One day a bunch of us boys bought a can of dynamite powder and went out in an old field to experiment a little. I was bending over the can when one of the boys lighted a piece of paper and threw it near the keg. Pow! The whole thing blew up, and I got the butt end of it. Great day in the morning. I was sure in a bad fix. All my clothes were burnt off me from my waist up. Only thing that saved me was my fleece-lined underwear. I was a mile from any doctor and had to walk to him. It was a bitter cold day. The fellows put some of their coats on me, and off I went. Even my finger nails dropped off as I walked along. My hair came off on sheets of skin. The doctor said it was a miracle that I closed my eyes. For six weeks I suffered agony, day and night. The doctor cut holes in a piece of cloth for my eyes, nose, and mouth and applied it to the burnt surface. The next morning he'd pull that piece off and apply another. My mother begged him to let her grease it, but he assured her I'd have scars if she did. There wasn't a single scar, but my skin is still very tender. One of my friends said, 'Some men die and go to gell, but I be-dog if you didn't make you a hell without dying.'
"Well, about a year later, I was jerking soda in a drug store, and the peanut parcher exploded. It, too, got me in the face. Knocked these four aide-front teeth up two inches into my face and cut this gash on my lip.
"You possibly noticed I'm crippled. When the explosions got over, I decided I'd go to Charleston on an excursion. That night I slept on a chair in the open and, when I waked up, I couldn't tell whether I was black or white. Honestly, I was covered with mosquitoes. I went down with high fever. Doctor called it malarial. I had one convulsion after another. Then I woke one morning and discovered I couldn't move hand or foot. For six months I was more helpless than a baby. Infantile paralysis. Finally I learned to walk on crutches and used them several months. But I was still a good sport. I'd ride any kind of a wild horse. I did every thing anybody else ever did. One day I remember I was 'riding up a storm' and the horse threw me on the edge of town. While he was running, I lost both my crutches, and there I had to lie on the wet cold ground till an old Negro man came along in a wagon and picked me up. I always called his 'The Good Samaritan' after that. Mr. I've had some experiences. Swimming? I'm crazy about swimming. I'd like to swim the Atlantic Ocean, if I dared. But I can't swim ten feet. I have cramps so bad.
"It's nearly four o'clock," Mr. Wiley said as he looked at his watch, "and I'll have to be going pretty soon. Trust my reputation to my wife? No, sirree. Wife'll tell the truth on me. I'm going to stick closer than Grant did around Richmond, till you leave. I didn't marry till I was twenty-six, and Alice doesn't know quite all the devilment I did. Yes, ma'am, I did some, haven't quit it all yet. I've improved on some of it, though. We were married in 1916, while Alice and I were both working in the mill at Lockhart. Anything unusual about the courtship? No, nothing. I just courted her nine nights out of a week for two years before she'd consent to have me. Honeymoon? Not worth mentioning. We went to the preacher Sunday afternoon and back to work next morning.
"You see I had stopped school in the ninth grade. Boys do such foolish things, don't they? So I decided the best thing for me to do was to go back to school and graduate from high school, like my wife had done. I got the job as janitor of the school, and they paid me forty dollars a month. Alice worked some in the afternoons, and she earned seventy-five cents for that. Before the two years were over, we had two children. And it was tough, I'm telling you. But we lived on that money and made do debt.
"While I was in school, we organized a little dramatic club. We gave plays and raised six hundred dollars, with which we bought some paintings, for the school. I was always Blackface, Simple Willie, or something like that, the comedian of the crowd. I did some fancy dancing, too. I haven't quit all of my foolishness yet. Several years ago, I was in Newberry. And one night about twelve o'clock, I pulled my hair down over my eyes and took off my collar and tie and coat, looking as shabby as I could. Leaning against the side of the house, staring into the plate glass window, I gazed at a suit of clothes. A policeman walked up. I drawled out, 'Good evenin', Mr. Polaeshman. Nish night, ain' it? Thash a good-lookin' shuit o' clothes. Ain' it, Mr. Polaeshman?"
"'Yes. Looks all right.'"
"'You reckon it'll fit me, my friend?'"
"'Possibly so, but I didn't come here to discuss clothes with you. You're drunk and going to get into trouble, old man. I'll have to arrest you.'"
"'Arrest me? No, shir, I ain' drunk. You got tho wrong man. I ain' even had a drink. I sure ain' drunk, Cep'n.'"
"'Oh, yes, you are drunk, and you know it. Consider yourself under arrest,'" as he placed his hand on my shoulder.
"At this moment, the chief stepped from 'round the corner and, addressing the newly appointed policeman, said, 'Jim the man ain't drunk. He's a Baptist preacher. Let him go. This is a frame-up. We're just giving you a try-out.'"
"'Why, Chief, I'll be darned if he ain't drunk. Yes, sir. He's a drunk man, if ever saw one. Why, I small whiskey on his breath. I know he's drunk.'
"I pulled a good one on the Methodist preacher recently. Carroll's a very matter-of-fact sort of fellow, you know. I dialed his number one morning early, and the conversation went like this:
"'Is dis Reverent Carroll? Reverent, does you ever marry folks? Marry colored folks? Well, Reverent, me and Liza done decided las' night to git ma'ied in de mornin's and we'll be 'round dere about eight o'clock. Yaas, sir, 'bout eight o'clock, Boss.'
"'Now, John, if you want me to marry you, you better he here exactly at eight, for I'm going to take wife to a meeting about that time.'
"'All right, sir, Boss. Us'll be dere 'zactly at eight o'clock.'"
"Then I changed from dialect to my customary speech.
"'Oh, say, Carroll, this in Wiley. When is that union nesting going to be?
"'Here, here. Somebody's using this 'phone. I was talking to a Negro about marrying him.
"I just have to have some fun every now and then. I can't allow myself to think too seriously about the problems of life. Recreation? Well, now you've got me. No recreation and no hobbies. The children and their mother play Chinese Checkers and other games at night and ride bicycles in the afternoon. But there's only one thing I enjoy doing, and that's shooting pool. Oh, I do love it. Sometimes I think I will get me a table, put it in the attic, and when I can't stand the strain any longer, sneak off up there and shoot pool. Gee, I'd love it. Wouldn't be any harm, would it?"
"I'm crazy about my car and do love to drive it. While talking in a group of men recently, one of the fellows said he believed I'd like to be buried in my Dodge. Then another one said that reminded him that he wanted to be buried in his Austin. I told him he'd batter swap it for a Dodge before he went, for if he happened to find himself where he didn't want to stay, his Austin wouldn't get his out fast enough.
"I think I'm a pretty cooperative sort of fellow. And the fact that I was converted in a Presbyterian Church, under the preaching of a Methodist evangelist, and become a Baptist preacher proves it. Don't you think so? I had always gone to church in a sort of half-hearted way, and somewhere, deep down in my soul, I had felt that I wanted to preach. So this experience in the Presbyterian Church settled that, and I struck out for the Baptist Seminary at Louisville, Kentucky. Left Alice and the children living in a mill house at Lockhart. I stayed there two years and came out owing $1,500. I was sent to Lynchburg, Virginia, to build a church. Took my family with me out there. But after three months, I decided the time wasn't ripe for building. However, I got me a job in the mill out there, and we made expenses. Than a call came for me to go to the Northside Baptist Church in Rock Hill, South Carolina. There had been dissension in the church, and I found sight members on the roll. The only salary I had for three months was the loose collections I received each Sunday, usually six or sight dollars. Then the deacons fixed my salary at $1,500, and they paid me full salary for the months I hadn't gotten such money. The membership grew to four hundred, and the salary increased to $1,900. After Staying there nine years, I moved over to West End, where I stayed for four years at a salary of $2,200. Our next call came from Columbia, and these folks have already put up with me for ten years.
"We built this parsonage at a cost of $4,500, and it's paid for. Now we're planning a new church. We bought those corner lots for $1,000, and $7,000 has been collected on a $30,000 plant. We'll begin work on it pretty soon. If I have any worries now about finances, it's my fault. We should live pretty well on my salary of $2,600, and we do. As soon as my cheek comes, we take out a tenth Been tithing eighteen years. The balance is divided equally between me and my partner, Mrs. Wiley. We both have budgets. She takes care of the household bills, and I care for insurance premiums, doctor's bills and the big things like that. She beats as a little saving. She's pretty thrifty. There are lots of extra demands on a preacher's pocketbook. I'm going this afternoon to take two poundings to two families. One moved in here from Charlotte, North Carolina, without friends, money, or a job. Then there's a poor woman over here dying with cancer, and she's in dire need of help. Lord, Lord, folks do have such a hard time.
"I'm moderator of the Baptist Association, Red Cross chairman of the county, president of the Temperance Club, end president of the Civitan Club. This is my honor key. All these things take money. I have an annuity insurance policy and a retirement insurance, on both of which I'm paying a little more than $100 a year. I figure $400 a year for car expense, and I think it costs me that.
"My friends say I'm temperamental. I reckon that's a good substitute for the word. I overdo the temper part of it all right. Lawsy me, I've got a temper. Makes me sick for a week to get mad. Ever fight? Law, child. I've pretty nigh killed a few. But this is graveyard talk. I lose my temper every now and then and have to open the exhaust valve or there might be another dynamite explosion. But I love folks lots end would do anything in the world for the very ones that make me so dying mad. I hope I am just temperamental."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: A HAPPY FAMILY
Date of First Writing	January 18, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Reverend T.A. Snyder (white)
Fictitious Name	William Wiley
Street Address	Second Avenue
Place	West Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Baptist Preacher
Name of Writer	Mattie T. Jones
Name of Reviser	State Office
The Willey house, built of hand-pressed brick, is conspicuous in a neighborhood where small frame cottages are the rule. A hedge borders the yard, and shrubbery has been planted at the front and sides.
I walked up to the door, painted ivory, as is all the woodwork of the house, and rang the bell. Mr. Wiley answered the bell - a tall, erect, frail-looking man of about fifty years of age and with a noticeable limp in his step. His bushy hair, originally brown, was streaked with gray, and his brown eyes lighted as he recognized us.
"Well, I declare, if it isn't Mrs. Stevens. Come right in. How are you today? It's a lovely day to be gadding around, isn't it? Let me see," and his thoughts came fast as he pondered just where we should sit. "I know. We'll go to the kitchen." And Mr. Wiley led the way through the living room, attractive with hardwood floors and tasty furnishings, into the back hall. He talked as he went. "Mrs. Wiley and a bunch of women are having some sort of a meeting in the study where we always sit, and I think the kitchen in at ill warm. Honestly, you won't mind a bit?"
The kitchen was neatly furnished, a black and white color scheme having been used. The sun came streaming in at the window and heightened its cheerful atmosphere.
"You'll please excuse me for meeting you in my shirt sleeves and without a collar and tie. I was just fixing to shave when the door bell rang," Mr. Wiley continued, as he informally took his coat from the back of a chair and put it on. He lit his pipe as we were seated about the small stove.
This never-saw-a-stranger sort of fellow soon made you feel at home, and you at once began to wonder if you hadn't been friends for years. Finally, the conversation drifted to a former visit that had been interrupted because of a previous engagement of Mr. Wiley's.
"Well, let me see. Did you find the folks I told you about the other day? And did you get all those stories written already?
"Yes, we found them all right and got some good stories. But we've come this morning to have you tell us something about yourself. You will, of course."
"No, sir-ree. Not me. Get somebody who's done something worth while. There are scores of 'em around in these diggings. Somebody told you I have? Lawsy mercy, who was it? He ought to be shot for Ananias or Sapphire. Whet you going to charge me for this anyway? Nothing? Well, than what'll you charge as to lot as got out of it?"
A shorts plump, teen-age girl, with a lovely complexion, soft brown eyes, and wavy brown hair passed through the hall, holding her books under bar left arm, "Daddy, the telephone."
"Yes, I'm going in about an hour," we heard this pastor say to the parishioner, "Glad to have you and Mrs. Smith go with me. I'll be by for you about 4 o'clock. Good-bye."
When he was seated again, he said, "That was Label t our second daughter, and she's a whole team. They call her 'Little Willy.' I bet she knows everybody in that school by name and talks to everybody every day. Lord, she's a plum moss. She's in the tenth grade, and recently the principal walked in one morning and asked Miss Johnson, 'What about Mabel Wiley? Is she a pretty good girl?' 'Yes, she's a good student and as clever as she can be.' The girl sitting next to Mabel heard her say, as she threw up her hands, 'Lord, teach her better. My heart was in my threat, I thought she was going to tell him the truth."
"Now, Lloyd, that tall, lean, lanky 6-foot something you saw pass with his breeches rolled up above his knee, he has a one-track mind and is concerned with only one thing in this world, and that's riding a bicycle. He's a professional cyclist, I'm telling you. That's all I've ever found he wants to do. Johnny's three years younger, and he's caught up with him in school. It's nip and tuck with 'em now. I've asked his teacher how in the heck she can pass Lloyd in English. The other day he looked out of a window and called to a boy, 'Jim, come on in. I ain't quite ready. I see-ed you soon as you turnt the corner. I knowed it was you soon as I see-ed the red bicycle.' Land sakes, I wouldn't give him a zero. But he's lots like his daddy, a regular chip off the old block. I declare.
"Johnny's the baby and his Mother's pet. Looks just like her, too, with those big blue eyes and dimples in both cheeks. Doesn't like any petting outside the home, though. Tells his mother the boys will call him a sissy. He's the serious member of the family.
"Lord, woman, you don't want to know nothing about this crowd. You better go find somebody who's worth something. You see we were tarheels. I was born in Rutherfordton, North Carolina, back in 1890. My father owned a 200-acre farm there. He taught school when he wasn't busy with the farm work, taught the three R's, you know. Those were blue-back speller days. He started me off in that good old book we hear so much about, but I didn't get to 'baker'. My mother had only a common school education. Farming in North Carolina was in those days a pretty up-hill sort of business, and making a decent living for eight children wasn't so easy. So my father wasn't making ends meet, and he gave a little mortgage on the farm. Finally he decided he could do better if he moved to a cotton mill and let the farm go, so we moved to Henrietta, North Carolina. That was thirty-five years ago.
"I began work in the mill when I was about fourteen years old. I earned 20 cents a day; yes, ma'am, 20 cents. I worked in the card room, ran drawings, and worked in the spinning room for two years. By that time I was making thirty cents and wearing brogans and jeans. My mother wove, spun, and made the cloth, and then she made the pants for us boys. The old loom is in the attic in my sister's home now where father lives. He is eighty years old. My mother died several years ago at the age of seventy-five.
"But mill folks just won't stay put. We moved down to Lockhart, South Carolina,' and I earned sixty cents a day there doffing. I guess I made as much as twelve dollars a week before I left the mill."
As he stroked his gray hair, which fairly stood on end, he said, "My daughter has just washed my hair. No, you missed the guess, no beauty parlor. Hannah has bad eyes and likes to do things like that because they don't require close vision. When she was only two years old, she accidently fell down two flights of stairs. Oh, it was awful. Her optic nerve was completely shattered. She has been totally blind several times and has had three hospital experiences. Oh, yes, she finished high school, thanks to Dr. Harden. I declare I can never forget Doc. He was so interested in the case and watched her with so much concern. Saw her regularly every week and assured us if he found study was against her, he'd let us know. She managed to get through, though, and is a grand girl.
"There the ladies go now. They finished their work in a jiffy. I bet their gossip is marked 'to be continued' till next time, though. Let's move over to the study now; it will be more comfortable, I'm sure."
This room was cozy in its simple furnishings - a wicker divan, with several rocking chairs to match, a sewing machine, a small table, and built-in book shelves at the left side of the mantelpiece. On the mantel were some black vases, a clock, and some Indian relics. The floor was covered with linoleum of rose-and-blue design. An oval mirror and attractive pictures hung on the walls.
Mr. Wiley presented us to his wife, a rather large woman with soft blue eyes and light brown hair, in a print dress, figured in blue and white. Mrs. Wiley presented us to her mother, massive in size her snow-white hair bobbed and her complexion like that of a school girl. She wore a soft, knitted jacket over an orchid-colored dress, with a cameo at the neck. She had a wrist watch on her left arm, and a gold bracelet on the right. Mrs. Wiley was making a yo-yo spread and her mother a quilt of log-cabin design.
"I don't do much of this kind of thing, and anther doesn't like it much better than I do, but neither of us is very well to-day, so we hauled the sewing out of the closet," said Mrs. Wiley. "I'm recuperating from intestinal flu, and mother is suffering more than usual with asthma. Flu is a treacherous thing, and I should go to the hospital for a thorough check. But when I'm inclined to go, I'm too sick, and when I get better, I hope I'm all O.K., and put it off. The aching tooth, you know."
"Alice, I'm pulling all the old skeletons out of the closet this afternoon and parading them before Mrs. Stevens," Mr. Wiley said, as he knocked the tobacco out of his pipe for a re-fill.
"Well, so long as you stick to your text and don't tell on me and mother, we have no objections."
Mabel came blustering into the room, and, throwing her books on the table with a bang, stood before the mirror combing her hair and applying lipstick. After an exchange of greetings, she said in a sort of soliloquy: "Boy friends? You should see my latest. He's six feet three inches. We look like Mutt and Jeff. Do I like school? Yeah, crazy 'bout the holidays. What am I going to do when I finish? Nothing, like the rest of the family." And she exchanged understanding glances with her father, who responded in an undertone, "Lord, is there no balm in Gilead?"
"If you want to know shout our family tree," Mabel continued, "I can tell you the limbs are all dead. Don't see why you didn't come on a Sunday, we're all dressed up that day and look a little better. You want to know if we're struggling. We just are, though. Bean struggling indefinitely, and we're about to have to and it all. I've got to go study for those old exams. Gee, but I hate 'em."
Mr. Wiley moved over nearer to the stove, fastening his collar band and putting on a green tie and resumed his story, "I haven't told you about my job experiences. When I was making the climb to the hill to which we all go sooner or later. I reckon I was about sixteen. One day a bunch of us boys bought a can of dynamite powder and went out in an old field to experiment a little. I was bending over the can when one of the boys lighted a piece of paper and threw it near the keg. Pow! The whole thing blew up, and I got the butt end of it. Great day in the morning. I was sure in a bad fix. All my clothes were burnt off me from my waist up. Only thing saved me was my fleece underwear. I was a mile from any doctor and had to walk to him. It was a bitter cold day. The follows put some of their coats on me, and off I went. Even my finger nails dropped off as I walked along. My hair came off on sheets of skin. The doctor said it was a miracle that I closed my eyes. For six weeks I suffered agony, day and night. The doctor out holes in a piece of cloth for my eyes, nose, and south and applied it to the burnt surface. The next morning he'd pull that piece off and apply another. My mother begged him to let her grease it, but he assured her I'd have scars if she did. There wasn't a single scar, but my skin is still very tender. A friend said about the accident, 'Some out men die and go to hell, but I be-dog if you didn't make you a hell with dying.' The doctor charged about $100, and dad paid it. I didn't have that to worry about, thank goodness.
"Well, about a year later, I was jerking soda in a drug store, and the peanut parcher exploded. It, too, got me in the face. Knocked these four side-front teeth up two inches into my face and cut this gash on my lip. Did it hurt my looks? No, it helped my looks.
"You possibly noticed I'm crippled. When the explosions got over, I decided I'd go to Charleston on an excursion. That night I slept on a chair in the open and, when I waked up, I couldn't tell whether I was black or white. Honestly, I was covered with mosquitoes. I went down with high fever. Doctor called it malarial. I had one convulsion after another. Then I woke one morning and discovered I couldn't move hand or foot. For six months I was more helpless than a baby. Infantile paralysis. Finally I learned to walk on crutches and used them several months. I'd ride wild horses. Tried anything and everything. One day I was 'riding up a storm,' and the horse threw me on the edge of town, causing me to lose my crutches. Oh, my, I've had some experiences."
"Have you tried swimming? Or do you like to swim?"
"Gee, I'd like to swim the Atlantic Ocean, if I dared. Can't swim ten feet for cramps."
"Will, you have at least one thing in common with a great man. Think I'll write Mr. Roosevelt about your going to Warm Springs."
"Dare you to do it. You know one thing, I surely do like our President. That last message of his completely won me over. Did you hear it? I declare, it was great. I see he's coming back to the State. When he was here in October, and I looked into his face, I liked him better than ever. He's taken care of the backwash all right."
A neighbor dropped into the room, a Mrs. Ford, Mr. Wiley said, "I just call her 'Mrs. V-8' when she works in the ladies' aid to suit me; but when she sorter slows down, I change it to 'Mrs. T. Model.'"
"I'm usually a T Modal. Don't do much in the church but keep a seat warm. I do stand squarely behind these Wiley's. We all do. We think they are wonderful folks."
"Mother, we're having such a good time with these folks, I declare, I feel just like we ought to serve a little something. Any coca-cola 'round here?"
"Thank you very much, but we can't stay much longer. And, say, if it's time for you to go on those visits, maybe you'll trust your reputation with your wife."
"No, sir-ree. Wife'll tell the truth on me. I'm going to stick around here closer than Grant did around Richmond till you leave. I didn't marry till I was twenty-six, and Alice doesn't know quite all the devilment I did, anyway. Yes, ma'am, I did some. Haven't quit it all yet. I've improved on some of it, though. We were married in 1916, while Alice and I were both working in the mill at Lockhart. Anything unusual about the courtship? No. Nothing. I just courted her nine nights out of a week for two years before she'd consent to have me. Honeymoon? Not worth mentioning. We went to the preacher Sunday afternoon and back to work next morning.
You see I had stopped school in the ninth grade. Boys do such foolish things, don't they? So I decided the best tiling for me to do was to go back to school and graduate from high school, like my wife had done. I got the job as janitor of the school, and they paid as $40 a month. Alice worked some in the afternoons, and she earned 75 cents for that. Before the two years were over, we had two children and it was tough, I'm telling you, but we lived on that money and made no debt.
"While I was in school, we organized a little dramatic club. We gave plays and raised $600 with which we bought some paintings for the school. I was always Blackface, Simple Willy, or something like that, the comedian of the crowd. I did some fancy dancing, too, I haven't quit all my foolishness yet. Several years ago, I was in Newberry. And one night about 12 o'clock, I pulled my hair down over my eyes and took off my collar and tie and coat, looking as shabby as I could. Leaning against the side of the house, staring into the plate glass window, gazing at a suit of clothes, I was accosted by a policeman. I drawled out, 'Good evenin', Mr. Poleeshman. Nish night, ain' it? Thash a good-lookin' shuit o'clothes. Ain' it, Mr. Poleeshman?'"
"'Yes. Looks all right.'"
"'You reckon it'll fit me, my friend?'"
"'Possibly so, but I didn't come here to discuss clothes with you. You're drunk and going to get into trouble, old man. I'll have to arrest you.'"
"'Arrest me? No, shir, I ain' drunk. You got the wrong man. I ain' oven had a drink. I sure ain' drunk, Cap'n.'"
"'Oh, yes you are drunk and you know it. Consider yourself under arrest,'" as he placed his hand on my shoulder.
"At this moment, the chief stepped from 'round the corner, and, addressing the newly appointed policeman said, 'Jim, the man ain't drunk. He's a Baptist preacher; let his go. This is a frame-up; we're just giving you a try-out.'"
"'Why, Chief, I'll be darned if he ain't drunk. Yes, sir. He's a drunk man, if ever I saw one. Why, I smell whiskey on his breath. I know he's drunk.'"
"I pulled a good one on the Methodist preacher recently. Carroll's, a very matter-of-fact sort of fellow, you know, I dialed his number one morning early, and the conversation want like this:
"'Is dis Reverent Carroll? Reverent, does you ever marry folks? Marry colored folks?'
"'Oh, yes, I very often marry Negroes. Why?
"'Well, Reverent, me and Liza done decided las' night to git ma'led in de mornin' and we'll be 'round dere about 8 o'clock. Yaas, sir, 'bout 8 o'clock, Boss.'
"'Now, John, if you want me to marry you, you better be here exactly at eight, for I'm going to take wife to a meeting about that time.'
"'All right, sir. Boss. Us'll be dare 'zactly at 6 o'clock.'"
Then Mr. Wiley changed from dialect to his customary speech.
"'Oh, say, Carroll, this is Wiley. When is that union meeting going to be?'
"'Here, here. Somebody's using this phone. I was talking to a Negro about marrying him.'
"I just have to have some fan every now and then. I can't allow myself to think too seriously about the problems of life. Recreation? Well, now you've got me. No recreation and no hobbies. The children and their mother play Chinese Checkers and other games at night and ride bicycles in the afternoon. But there's only one thing I enjoy doing, and that's Shooting pool. Oh, I do love it. Sometimes I think I will get me a table, put it in the attic, and when I can't stand the strain any longer, sneak off up there and Shoot pool. Gee, I'd love it. Wouldn't he any harm, would it?"
When Mrs. Wiley laughingly reminded him that he has a hobby, his Dodge car, he added, "That's the truth. I'm crazy about my car and de love to drive it. While talking in a group of men recently, one of the fellows said he believed I'd like to be buried in my Dodge. Then another one said that reminded him that he wanted to be buried in his Austin. I told him he'd better swap it in for a Dodge before he went, for if he happened to find himself where he didn't want to stay, his Austin wouldn't get him out fast enough.
"I think I'm a pretty cooperative sort of fellow. And the fast that I was converted in a Presbyterian Church, under the preaching of a Methodist Evangelist, and became a Baptist preacher proves it. Don't you think so? I had always gone to church in a sort of half-hearted way, and somewhere, deep down in my soul, I had felt that I wanted to preach. So this experience in the Presbyterian Church settled that, and I struck out for the Baptist Seminary Louisville Kentucky. Left Alice and the children living in a mill house at Lockhart. I stayed there two years and came out owing $1500. I was sent to Lynchburg, Virginia, to build a church. Took my family with me out there. But after three months, I decided the time wasn't ripe for building. However, I got me a job in the mill out there, and we made expenses. Then a call came for me to go to the Northside Baptist Church in Rock Hill, South Carolina. There had been dissension in the church, and I found eight members on the roll. The only salary I had for three months was the loose collections I received each Sunday, usually $6 or $8. Then the deacons fixed my salary at $1500, and they paid as full salary for the months I hadn't gotten much money. The membership grew to 400 and the salary increased to $1,900. After staying there nine years, I moved over to West End, where I stayed for four years at a salary of $2,200. Our next call came from Columbia, and these folks have already put up with me for ten years."
"And you are responsible for this nice now parsonage, I presume?"
"Yes, we built it at a cost of $4,600, and no debt on it. It's got nine rooms."
"The church building and those temporary Sunday School rooms are awful, but we've already paid $1,000 for some lots on the corner, and $7,000 has been collected for a $30,000 new plant. We're going to begin work on it pretty soon."
"You don't have any financial worries with a salary of $2,600 now, I reckon?"
"Well, if I do, it's my fault. As soon as I get my check, we take out a tenth. Been tithing eighteen years. The balance is divided equally between me and my partner over there. We both have budgets. She takes care of the household bills, and I care for insurance premiums, doctors' bills and the big things like that. She beats me a little saving. She's pretty thrifty. There are lots of extra demands on a preacher's pocketbook. I'm going this afternoon to take two poundings to two families. One moved in here from Charlotte, North Carolina, without friends, money, or a job. Then there's a poor woman over here dying with a cancer, and she's in dire need of help, Lord, Lord, folks do have such a hard time.
"I'm moderator of the Baptist Association, Rod Cross Chairman for the county, President of the Temperance Club, and President of the Civitan Club. This is my honor key. All these things take money. I have an annuity insurance policy and a retirement insurance, on both of which I'm paying a little more than $100 a year. I figure $400 a year for car expanse, and I think it costs as that."
A tall, thin, handsome young fellow came into the study without formally knocking at the door. His brown eyes fairly sparkled as he talked. He was nicely dressed in a dark suit. "This is Billy, Jr., our oldest child," his father told us.
"Oh, yes, there's a madam I've been married two years. She was Jane Moore. We like married life pretty well. No divorce anticipated yet," Billy said as he laughed, showing a set of pearly white teeth. "Only alibi she could find would be low finances, and she's been satisfied so far. I think it'll last all right. I wish she had come over with me, but she's working to-day. We have apartment, and she finds it's too taxing to work all day. So she works at the notion counter in the 10 cent store in the afternoons. Gives her spending money. She's buying furniture with sows of it. I've agreed to give her every dime that comes into my hands, and her bank account will be bigger than mine before very long, I believe. These woman somehow know better than we men how to take care of the pennies."
Mrs. Wiley explained that Billy, Jr., had come in to see Mrs. Ford on business, and they went across the hall into the kitchen. She told us that Billy, Jr., graduated from high school and immediately got a job with the Jewel Box at a salary of $25 a week. Billy, Jr., is superintendent of the junior department in Sunday School, and both she and Daisy teach in that department.
The Wileys do not keep a servant, and Mrs. Wiley doesn't have time to do as much church work as she would really like to do. In recent years they do not try to have a garden. Fresh vegetables come to the door every day, and are cheaper, perhaps, then can be grown. But Mrs. Wiley tries to give her family a balanced diet, fresh vegetables and fruits, meats, milk and butter. The parsonage is too near the church to keep a cow.
"Judging by the size of mother and me, you'd guess we get enough to eat, wouldn't you? I weigh about 160 pounds.
Her mother, who had sat rather quietly throughout the visit, jokingly said she couldn't 'tend to herself, much less the rest of the family, and so she had said little. "You want to know my age, I guess? How old do I look? The doctor told me to quit having birthdays, but when I did have one, I was 72, and tipped the scales at 200 pounds."
"You seem about as temperamental as your son-in-law," I observed.
"Temperamental? I reckon that's a good substitute for the word. I overdo the temper part of it all right. Lawsy me. I've got a temper. Makes me sick for a week to get mad. Ever fight? Law, child. I've pretty nigh killed a few. But this is graveyard talk. You don't know how I do love folks and what I'll do for the very ones that make me so mad. I just lose my temper every now and then."
Realizing the hour for his appointment was past due, I thanked Mr. Wiley for a pleasant visit. "Before you go I must show you our Indian pottery water jug. You see it has two handles, which makes it very easy to handle. Yes, we, too, think it's beautiful. When I was pastor at Rock Hill, I ran out twice a month to the Catawba Indian Reservation to preach to those folks. The city nurse and I did some social service work with those people.
"There was a big, burly Indian living 'way out almost beyond the border of civilization. He had a very sick baby once, and we want out there and saved its life by taking it to the hospital. Pretty soon he had some serious trouble with his shoulder. We heard about that and brought him in to Rock Hill to the hospital. When we were taking him home over the cross-country road, we passed a farmer on the right of the road. The nurse and patient sat on the front seat, and both Miss McCowan and I observed that the Indian Chief raised his arm and turned completely 'round as we passed the man.
"Why did you change your position just now?" the nurse asked him. "Does your shoulder hurt worse.'"
In his broken English, he explained that the countryman was very provoked when they put the road on his land end every now and again took a notion to shoot up somebody. He waited for us to be his targets that day, and when the Indian friend saw his pistol, he turned to shield Miss McCowan from the blow and to receive it himself. The nurse was very much touched by this act of appreciation. The jug is his expression of thanks to me."