Approximately 1800 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	BEN ADAMS.
Date of First Writing	March 22, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Ned Fort
Race	White
Fictitious Name	Ben Adams
Address	Awendaw, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer and Cattleman
Name of Writer	Charles A. Von Ohsen
Name of Reviser	State Office.
Code No. 1655
Charles A. Von Ohsen
McClellanville, S. C.
LIFE HISTORY
BEN ADAMS.
Ben Adams was born in a little shack, on the Jamestown Highway. He doesn't know the exact year, Dor when the house burned, some years later the family Bible was burned in it. There were two sisters and two brothers in the family, but they are all dead now.
His father was quite well-off. He was a cattleman, owning six or seven hundred head of cows and several hundred acres of land. But one of his slaves killed him and unfortunately his widow and children lost the cattle and property.
There were very few schools in this part of the country when "Uncle Ben", as he is called, was a child, and so he got very little education. He attended a school in Kingstree for about two years. His teacher was a Mr. Epps.
When a young man, Uncle Ben was quite a sport. He went with the girls, danced and drank. He says that the young people frolicked in the winter, for in the summer they had to work. Besides the weather was too hot. At the dances, which lasted for several days, he says that they were fed the best of food and plenty of it.
The year of his marriage has been forgotten, but Ben believes that he was about twenty years of age. He married Eugenia Butler. His family did not approve of the match, so he has lived apart from the other members of his family, except in cases of illness or death. He and his wife raised nine children, all of whom are now living. The oldest is sixty-two years of age. His wife has been dead for three or four years.
The house is a one-story, whitewashed, frame structure with a front porch running the entire length. The porch is filled with stove wood, deer horns and a wildcat hide. There are no curtains nor shades to the windows. In the living-room is a bed, sewing-machine and one or two chairs. The walls are practically lined with enlarged photographs, deer heads, deer horns, turkey feet and beard and tobacco sacks filled with seed. Besides the living-room, there are two bedrooms and a kitchen, used also as a dining room. The entire house is very dean, but poorly furnished. The yard surrounding the house, however, is very unkempt. It is strewn with tin cans, buckets and all sorts of rubbish. The out-houses are all in need of repairs. They afford the cows, pigs and chickens better protection.
When he was first married he says that the most of the money he made was from killing and selling wild game. Although there is double or triple the amount of money in circulation now, he says that he could buy much more for a dollar then.
Speaking of his earlier years he says: "I can remember away back yonder, there were no conveniences at all, not even a lamp. For lights we had to mold tallow in the shapes of candles. The cooking had to be done in the chimneys, for there were no stoves. There weren't even any plows, harrows or anything in that line except hand-made turn-plows. Now and then you'd see a buggy, but very seldom, never a wagon and even ox carts were scarce. It took two days to go to Charleston.
He recalls that when he came home drunk, his wife sensed his state afar off by the way he whooped. She would say: "Children get your hats and get for Manigault Bay for the old man is drunk again". They would stay out of the way until they knew he was sober.
None of the children, except the youngest boy, received an education. There were no schools in walking distance.
His children are all living near him, and one boy and one girl live with him. The boys are all either farming or working on WPA projects.
He has this to say about education: "I suppose children should get an education, but I don't see where it does them any good for most of them don't use it and they ain't worth the powder and shot it takes to kill them. Now of course it's different when a child wants to be a lawyer, doctor, school-teacher or preacher, they use their education."
Uncle Ben has never left home since he got married, except to go to some nearby village or to Charleston on business. Before his marriage, he went to Mississippi and worked for a year.
He not only does not believe in birth control, but he thinks it is a great sin.
He is satisfied with his past life for he loves the farm and cattle, bat he is very dissatisfied with life at present for having always been a hard-working man and one whose chief pleasure was found in his work, it goes very hard with him not to be able to do anything. He is too feeble to work hard nom and his eyesight is very bad. So he has to get someone else to look after his cattle and to plant his little crop of corn, peas and potatoes.
Uncle Ben says, "When the sunrise catches me in the bed, there's something wrong, for I get up early and do whatever work I can; but that is very little now for I have to stop and rest so often."
He has spent very little on doctor bills, for the doctor who always attended him and his family never made a charge, just took whatever they gave him, such as, hams, turkeys, corn or hogs.
Knowing nothing about a balanced diet and caring less, he eats whatever he has, which is mostly the staple foods, such as, rice, hominy, corn bread vegetables, pork or wild game, and occasionally some beef.
He is not a member of any church, but used to attend the Methodist Church sometimes.
When asked about politics he said; "I have always voted the Democratic ticket, for the man as best I know, is best fitted for the office. Nobody ever did come around me at the poles to try and persuade me to vote their way. I always said that they could vote to suit themselves and I intended to suit myself."
There are no pleasures for Uncle Ben now. He goes to the store for tobacco and comes right back home. He can't even hunt any more for his eye-sight is too bad.
He has worked very hard all of his life and has worked and hunted in the worst kind of weather. But he has been very lucky, and is in good health now, for a man of eighty-seven. Although he is feeble and his eye-sight is bad, he never has even a head-ache. His teeth are his own and can eat anything that his appetite calls for, without ill effects.
He says that he could live very comfortable on ten dollars a week, but he makes much less than this. His only form of income is from his cattle.
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
Title:	A HELL HOLE FARMER
Date of First Writing	March 31, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. Johnny Haselton
Race	White
Fictitious Name	Jimmie Green
Address	Shulerville, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer
Name of Writer	Charles A. Von Ohsen
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project 1655
Charles A. Von Ohsen
McClellanville, S.C.
Life History
A HELL HOLE FARMER
Hell Hole Swamp lies between McClellanville and Moncks Corner, South Carolina. This swamp divides into many branches which cross the road many times. The tall cypress trees and water oaks cluster together as though each one was trying to get it's full share of the water. The water is black in color and runs in a meandering trail over old logs and cypress knees. On the outer edges of the swamp are little patches of cleared land that breaks the solid masses of pines.
There are many old roads that wander around in every direction, eventually leading to a little store, where every one in the community makes his weekly purchases. These people seldom see each other except when they meet at the store. Of course there are a few who visit outside of this section, but most of them have never been further than Charleston. Many have never been to a movie and have never seen nor ridden on a train. There is no bus line through this section so most of the people have to be contented just to stay at home since they have no automobiles to travel in. This isolation has a tendency to make them live as their fore-fathers did. Mr. Jimmie Green, who is seventy-six years of age, was born in the Hell Hole region and unlike many of the people of this community gets a great deal of amusement out of the name.
He lives a in a four room frame house. The living room floor is covered with a congoleum rug. The furniture consists of a buffet, sewing machine, a victrola on a table, and five or six chairs. On the walls are many enlarged photographs, with snapshots stuck in the corners. Over the door are two helmets which two of the sons wore in the World War. Besides the living room there are three bed rooms in the main part of the house and on a wing, a combination kitchen sad dining room. The house though poorly furnished is immaculate.
In the yard is an old grindstone suspended between two oak trees, and an old-fashioned well with the curb made of a hollowed-out log. There are a few rose bushes, but no other shrubbery.
This is the story Mr. Jimmie told me:
"I like to live here. I am not bothered with any of the evils that you find out in the rest of the world. Here we are away from the cities and highways, with their gambling joints, liquor stores and such. We live a peaceful life here, where all of the families are good, honest, poor people. We still have to use oil lamps and bathe in wash tubs, but we don't mind that for we never have had anything else. We don't have fine houses and cars, but none of us have them, so it doesn't worry us at all. We visit each other on Sundays and help each other in time of trouble or sickness, and to my mind that is a sight better than not even knowing who your next door neighbor is.
"Now I am seventy-six years old and in bad health, so I'm not able to work, but there was a time when I worked from sun to sun. The first money I ever made was for chipping boxes. I got fifty cents per thousand, and I could chip eight or ten thousand a week. I got along pretty good in those days for you could buy so much more for a dollar then, than you can now. After I got older I started farming, planting cotton mostly. There was money in cotton then. I cleared seven or eight hundred dollars a year then. It was during this time that I put three thousand dollars in the bank for mine and Alice's old age, but the bank closed and I lost it all.
"I used to hunt deer, turkeys, and wild hogs a lot, but now I'm not even able to do that. There's no telling how many deer I have killed during my lifetime. Once I started cutting notches on my hunting horn for each one that I killed, but I traded that horn off and I never bothered to out notches on the other one.
"Even when I was a young man, I never was one to frolic much. I used to go to dances, but somehow I never could get dance in my feet. In those days a wedding was really something to talk about. The merrymaking sometimes lasted for several days. They are different from most of the weddings now. In the old days, a boy asked a girl's father for her, then they had a big wedding to which the whole countryside were invited. But now a boy tells a girl, 'Let's try marriage and see if we like it'. Then they hop into an automobile, go to a preacher or more often a Justice of the Peace, and get married.
"My mother died when I was six days old and from then until I was six or seven years old, I went from one home to another living with whatever kind neighbor was willing to keep me for my father was 'jack of all trades'. My wife called him a 'piddler'. When I was sight years old my father went to Mississippi and took me with him. We lived there for two years and that is the only time that I ever went away from here. Since then I ain't newer been on either a business nor a pleasure trip, ain't never had any desire to go away.
"I've been married twice. The first time I married Mary Mills. We had one son, but she only lived three years after we were married. After she died I stayed single six months and then married Alice Somerset. We had eight children, but we lost four of them when they were just babies.
"There was no school in this community, so I got no education. However, I think an education is a good thing to have, but it's not all. There's got to be a little work along with the education. I sent all my children to school long enough for them to learn to read and write their names, but none of them graduated. I needed them at home to help Alice and me with the work. They are all married now and have families of their own, but they live right here on my place - not one is too far away to hear me holler if I want him.
"I never owned an automobile and don't want one. If you were to bring the best automobile that's made and say, 'take it and drive it yourself'. I'd say, 'much obliged but take it back'.
"You know when I was a boy fourteen years old I helped my father build a bank for a water mill. Of course I didn't get any pay, but then it did me good, for as long as a boy is working he's not likely to get in any trouble. The first job that I ever had for which I was paid was working in the turpentine woods.
"We own our own home and two hundred and sixty-five acres of land and we wouldn't sell any of it for any price, for we've got just enough land for each of the boys to have a nice home, and what on earth would they do with all those children and no land? My advice to any and everybody is to own a home for there's nothing like a place to call your own when you get old.
"You might not believe it, but during the past five years, I have only earned nine dollars and sixty cents in cash. The government gives me five dollars a month. With this I have to buy what few groceries I don't raise, tobacco and medicine. Somehow though I manage to save back some to pay doctor bills. The doctor is mighty good though. He knows I ain't got no money and he charges me accordingly. I never had but very few doctor bills to pay for the children, for they were all healthy, but ay wife and myself have been sick a great deal. The nearest doctor lives fifteen miles away at McClellanville. One of my sons has an automobile though, and he takes us to the doctor when the need arises.
"We have it mighty tough now. I don't make any money sometimes we are in is need of the necessities. If I could have an income of thirty dollars a month, I could live comfortably and have no worries.
"People these days do things just backwards, according to my opinion. They want to sleep all the morning and stay up all night, but old as I am I get up at daylight. Soon as I get up, I feed the mule, chickens, and my two cows, then about seven o'clock we have breakfast. After this I do whatever work I am able to do around the place, and at twelve o'clock we have dinner. Sometimes I take a rest after dinner. The reminder of the afternoon I piddle around doing first one thing and then another. About five o'clock I feed and water the stock. We have supper at six o'clock. If I'm not too tired I sit up until sight o'clock, but if I'm real tired I go to bed at dusk dark."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:	GABRIEL WASHINGTON
Date of First Writing	February 22, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Gabriel Meyers
Race	Negro
Fictitious Name	Gabriel Washington
Address	McClellanville, S.C.
Occupation	Laborer
Name of Writer	Charles A. Von Ohsen
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project 1655
Charles A. Von Ohsen
McClellanville, S.C.
Life History
GABRIEL WASHINGTON
Gabriel Washington was born on the Peafield Plantation. His early home was a one-room house made of poles. It had an old-time clay chimney, everything but straight. The furniture consisted of handmade benches, tables and beds.
His father and mother worked in the rice fields, which "Gabe" says were in their bloom then. The first work that Gabriel ever did was to hoe in these fields, helping his parents finish their tasks. All the Negroes were given task work in those days. After he became old enough, he plowed in the rice fields.
It was at Wesley School, a one-teacher school on Montgomery Plantation that Gabriel learned to read, spell add and write his name. His teacher was John Whiney. "Gabe" studied his lessons faithfully and was a good boy in school for he was much afraid of John Whiney, a good but strict teacher; who believed that nothing would make a child study more or behave better than a good whipping. Gabriel also knew that if he got a licking at school, he was sure to get a harder one when he got home. When he was fifteen years of age, and in the second grade he had to quit school and go to work.
He then went back to the rice fields and worked for about two years. Then leaving Santee he went to work chipping boxes on a turpentine farm near McClellanville. His task was five thousand and seven hundred boxes a week, for which he was paid fifty cents a thousand. This was a small job for Gabriel. He completed his task in two and one half days. This job lasted about four years.
About this time Gabriel married Hannah Bennet. They had eight children, four girls and four boys, but they lost three of the girls and one boy.
Hannah died twelve years after he married her. Gabriel stayed single for five years and then took another wife Margaret Reid. He had no children by this marriage.
Gabriel decided to leave McClellanville and go go back to Santee where all of his relatives and his boyhood friends lived. He got a job working on the turpentine farm of Mr. Pittman. Soon after moving back, Margaret died.
It was some months after Margaret's death that Gabriel went on the only pleasure trip of his life. He spent a week with a friend in Hemingway. This was as far as he had ever been from home.
In 1932 he married for the third time a woman named Diana Ball.
They had a comfortable home, nicely furnished at Peafield, but it burned in 1933. "Gabe" tells about it in the following manner. "Diana been cooking breakfast and I been walk down in the field. I hear Diana holler, but I think she been holler at the chickens 'cause we have a stack of rice in the garden and them chickens was always in that rice. Then I look and see smoke. I start for the house as fast as I could go, but I couldn't even walk fast for one of my ribs been broke. When I get there I start hollering for I think Diana been in the house, but she been out in the yard. That house burn down to the ground and we ain't save nothing but the clothes we have on we back. I lose a forty dollar suit of clothes in that house. Then the stack of rice caught fire. I been throw sand on it, but that sand burn just like gasoline."
Gabriel, his wife and one daughter then moved to their present home, on the Seven Mile Road. They have never been able to finish this house and to get the nice furniture they want, for Gabriel has not had a good, steady job in several years.
The house in which they live is a small four room one, built of rough lumber with a gable on each side of the front. The front yard is divided by a fence. On the left of this fence is a vegetable garden and on the right is the "front yard". There is a walk bordered with lilies leading up to the front door. On each side of this walk are roses, snowdrops and bridal-wreathes. There are no steps to the front door, so you have to enter at the back. At the back is a small porch, then a hall running the length of the house. On the left of this hall is Gabriel's and Diana's bedroom. In it are two double beds, with clean sheets, pillow-cases, and comforts; a dresser and a trunk. The walls are papered with newspapers and pages from magazines. At the windows are faded, but clean cretonne curtains. On the right of the hall is the living-room. It is papered as the bedroom, except bright, pictured papers were used for it. This room is decorated with red Christmas rope and on the walls are two photographs, one of Shirley Temple and the other of Gabriel. The furniture consists of a dresser, used as a buffet with green pitcher and glasses on it, two tables, two chairs, a safe and a stove. The same kind of cretonne curtains are used in here. A door opens from this into the kitchen, which also serves as the dining room. It is papered with newspapers. In this room is a stove, table and washstand. The washstand is a receptacle for groceries, pots and pans. From the kitchen is a door opening into Lucille's, Gabriel's daughter, room. It is furnished with a bed, chair and stove.
In the winter "Gabe" takes his bath in the house by the fire, using a large wash-tub. Sometimes in the summer he goes down to the creek for a little swim. He swims very seldom now though, for he is getting too old.
Gabriel believes thatnpeople should have as many children as God sees fit to give them. He says that he doesn't think the size of his family had anything to do with his being poor.
As to morals, he says, "From a boy up to the present time I try as near as possible to do the right. Sometimes a person will talk wrong. But up 'till today I ain't never have white or black to point hand at me and say, 'Gabriel you did tief so and so from me'. Nobody can say I ever done wrong by them".
He is very proud of his ancestors for he says that they were always good, clean, honest people, who attended church regularly.
Gabriel says, "I ain't never own a car and I ain't want one. If I had the money, I never would but a car, I would much rather have a good mule and wagon".
Gabriel asserts that things are very different now from the time when he was a young man. He says that he fared much better then. There use to be many turpentine farms in this county on which he could get a steady job chipping boxes. Whereas he use to make ten to twelve dollars a week, he now makes three, provided the weather is good. He works at Hampton Plantation, hewing out lumber by hand or helping to keep up the grounds, and of course it is impossible to do this type of work in bad weather. Those weeks in which he cannot work he has to get groceries and tobacco on credit and it is very hard then for him to catch up when he does work. However he and Diana manage somehow to live on his little Income and to pay up the debts.
"Gabe" says that if he could have an income of ten dollars a week that he could repair his house, live comfortably and even save a little. But he is proud of his little farm, in spite of his small earnings, and is satisfied with his life. Although he knows nothing about mills and factories he is sure that he would not like to work in, one.
All of his children are married except Lucille. They have all built homes near Gabriel and anytime you go to see him, there are several of his twelve grandchildren around him.
In case of sickness when a doctor must be reached at once, Gabriel's son has a car that would get them to Georgetown or McClellanville in a very short time. "Gabe" says that he has paid about four hundred dollars for doctor bills since he was married. Gabriel was able to pay all these bills for he had a steady job the earlier part of his life.
He begins his day quite early, about five o'clock. As soon as he gets up he goes out in the yard and feeds the chickens and does any other little odd job around the place, while Diana is cooking breakfast. For breakfast they have hominy, butts meat, bread and coffee. After breakfast he leaves for work. In the spring he plows his land and gets it ready for planting. At twelve o'clock, if he is working at home, he knocks off and comes to the house. He and Diana, (for Lucille is off working) have their dinner of rice, collards, or some other vegetable, meat and bread. As soon as the midday meal is over, he is back at work again. At five o'clock Gabriel knocks off and feeds his ox, for Diana has already fed the chickens and pigs.
The remainder of the evening he spends talking with his sons, grandchildren and any neighbors that may come by.
Gabriel plants corn, rice, peas and potatoes and this is what enables him to live on his small income.
"Gabe" and Diana eat whatover they have on hand, as they know nothing of a balanced diet. They always have rice for dinner, as they raise their own rice.
Near Gabriel's house is a dance hall, with a piccalo. He says! "I hear the music, but I ain't never been there for that a place for the young courting couples and the old folks that go there just for drink and carouse and I ain't up for that. I is been a steward in the church for three years and it ain't look right for me to go to them places. To tell the truth I ain't care to go".
He is not critical of young people, however, he believes in them having a good time, just so they stay respectable along with it.
Gabriel considers as education very desirable and a great help in securing work. He sent all of his children to school and it was through no fault of his that not one ever graduated. They can all read, write and figure though.
He says that he registered in Charleston many years ago to vote, but never went back when voting time came. He is not interested in politics.
His greatest pleasure is hunting deer, turkeys and ducks with Dr. Rutledge, whom he has known since his boyhood days.
