Greeks in Asheville
Practically all of the 150 (est., 1939) Greeks in Buncombe County, N.C., live in Asheville, the county seat. Some of those who reside in the rural districts have businesses in town; the others are mostly retired business men. The 1930 census listed 66 foreign-born and 57 native-born Greeks in the county, 113 of whom lived in Asheville (60 foreign-born and 53 native-born). There are approximately 30 families, averaging slightly more than 4 persons each, and the balance are single men. Several of the men have native-born American wives, but there is no known instance of a Greek woman married to an American.
The entire Greek population is bilingual, and a few of the men know several languages. All but one or two are literate, but the educational average of the immigrants does not go much beyond grammar school. One man (S. Demos) was educated in a British school in Egypt, the others in public schools in Greece, Turkey, and America. The man employed by the Greek families to run the Greek school, where Greek history and the Greek language are taught, was educated in Greece and America, and holds a college degree. The local Greeks pay him a stated amount per pupil, but guarantee him a minimum salary of $150 a month.
In addition to the Greek school, all of the children attend the public schools, and their competence is relatively high. Some are above the average of native American pupils. The parents generally are ambitious for their children to finish high school at least. Many send their children to college. It is common practice for the father to take his son into his business, where the son does not go beyond high school, but if the son cares to do so, he may branch out for himself, often with financial help from his family.
In their personal contacts and social intercourse, almost all of the older Greeks use the Greek language exclusively. Among the younger people, the tendency is to employ English except when conversing with an older Greek. If an American should be engaged in conversation with a Greek, and another Greek joins them, the two Greeks will speak in their native tongue, unconscious of any discourtesy or breach of etiquette. If it seems to be indicated, one of them will interpret for the American from time to time, but only rarely will the Greeks lapse into English altogether. The immigrants learned English from other Greeks, word by word, as the occasion demanded, and from their contacts with Americans (with the exceptions of the teacher and the man who attended a British school). Some of the older ones know English so imperfectly that they are nearly unintelligible to the average American.
The first Greek in Asheville settled here about 1890, and operated a cafe near the railroad station, it is believed, but precise information cannot be secured. There was never a concerted or group immigration; merely individuals, or, at the most, one family at a time. Some few have left the community from time to time, but for the most part they have remained, and the Greek population has increased steadily, if slowly, from year to year.
There has been practically no direct immigration, nearly all coming from other States. Some came because of ill health, hoping to benefit from the favorable climate; others came because there seemed to be good business opportunities. One Greek (G. Demos) came here to settle up the business affairs of his sister's husband who had died. He liked Asheville, set up a business of his own, and married. He now has two children, and considers Asheville his permanent home. Born in a small town in Old Greece, as a young man he emigrated to America via Italy and France, landed in Boston, was employed in a drug store, and later moved to New York City, where he drove a taxi, worked for a commission merchant dealing in bananas, and acted as a bookmaker. He came to America because his sister had written him that he could "make plenty of money" over here. Her husband was doing well in business, and she was anxious for her brothers to succeed also. The brother and sister (who has since remarried, and has two children) live side by side in nearly identical houses, which they own, in a first-class residential district. The other brother joined them here, was set up in business, and married a local American girl.
Another (I. Arakas) came here with his brother because there was a good candy, tobacco, and soda-fountain business for sale on easy terms. They prospered, accumulated considerable real estate, and then went bankrupt when the real-estate market collapsed. The younger brother left, but the older is still here, operating a cafe, and is beginning to prosper again. He is married, and has one child.
Two other brothers (Pappas, or Pappadear) moved to Asheville to take advantage of a favorable business opportunity. They were born in Lynn, Mass., of immigrant parents from Attica, moved to Atlanta to live with their married sister when their father died, entered business there, and then later came here hoping to make more money. The older is married, owns his home and an automobile, and has three children. He thinks it is "bad luck for a bird to fly in the store." They operate a clothes-pressing, hat-cleaning, and shoe-shining business, and are successful.
A cafe man (N. Peterson) moved here from Norfolk, Va., to enter business with an American and another Greek. He and his wife were born in Old Greece, and migrated to Norfolk because they were ambitious to succeed economically. Their three children were born in Virginia. The cafe, which is open day and night, does a good business. It is very popular with the other Greeks because exotic dishes are prepared for their benefit. These are never listed on the regular menu, but may be ordered by anyone.
A few Greeks who have succeeded elsewhere, and retired, have come to Asheville to spend their last days because they like the physical features, or for other personal reasons.
The local Greek community is loosely organized, and the members are widely scattered as to their places of residence. An effort is being made to effect a closer organization, and it is meeting with some success in spite of intermittent bickering. The Greeks have bought and paid for a church lot, and have established a building fund. The church will not be started until sufficient funds are on hand to complete it and pay for it in full. Each member of the community has contributed to the cost of church and lot, and most of them contribute regular amounts at stated intervals.
Most of the Greeks are engaged in business; largely cafe, restaurant, and lunch-room, pool-room, shoe-shining, hat-cleaning, refreshment-stand, and similar enterprises.


The majority are making comfortable incomes, many own their homes, and a large number own automobiles. They are almost invariably well-dressed, and their standard of living compares very favorably with the American average.
Judging from arrests and convictions in the local courts, a number are engaged in such petty "rackets" as illicit liquor selling, lotteries, and miscellaneous gambling, along with their legitimate businesses. It is likely that more than a few derive most of their income from their illegal ventures. Their unlawful activity, however, is not regarded by them as vicious or immoral, their attitude being substantially that of the average citizen toward speeding in an automobile, or parking too long in a restricted zone: it is not inherently bad, and it is not a crime unless detected by the police. One former member of the community was in difficulty with the police so many times that he eventually returned to Greece. Another, serving a road sentence, was paroled upon the condition that he remain out of Buncombe County for a year.
Most of the Greek men indulge in alcoholics, but only a few excessively. Nearly all of them gamble on occasion, mostly with cards. Baptismal ceremonies are the most elaborate social functions, sometimes attended by Americans also.
About 35 of the men belong to the local chapter of the American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association (Ahepa), which has as its objective the teaching of good American citizenship. The president of the chapter is usually regarded as the leader of the entire Greek community. The incumbent is a business man who traveled extensively before he settled here, and who has built up a small fortune by means of a chain of shoe-repair shops and barber shops. He emigrated from Peloponnesos because he was ambitious to succeed in the New World, and because he had a distaste for military service. His parents were peasants, living in comparative poverty. There is no local chapter of the Greek-American lodge, but many of the men belong to American fraternal organizations, and some of them have held offices therein.
Practically all of the families and many of the single men subscribe to one of the Greek-language newspapers published in the larger cities, and some subscribe to the Hellenic World, "the only Greek newspaper in the United States published in English," and "dedicated to the interest of the American Greeks."
The older Greeks mostly confine their social activities to members of their own race, but the younger ones associate freely with Americans and other whites, and there appears to be no racial friction.
The Greek women have a more or less informal social organization which stresses music. Concerts and recitals are given at irregular intervals, and occasionally a play (one of the traditional Greek plays, usually, with children taking most of the parts). Instruction in music is almost universal in the Greek home.
(Real name, confidential: Asheville, N. C.) Writer - Douglas Carter
GAMBLER
A Greek Sketch
One of the local Greeks, John Anaxagoras, does not send his children to the Greek school. He was born in New England of immigrant parents from Attica, and he is proud of his American citizenship. He married an American and he wants his three children to be as nearly as possible like other American children. The Greek school, he feels, is inimical to good American citizenship, so he refuses to support it. He says that his children will have to learn their foreign languages and history in the public schools, along with the other American children. John speaks Greek himself, but whenever he converses in that language with another Greek in the presence of someone who speaks only English, he translates from time to time for the benefit of the latter.
As a young man, John moved from New England to Savannah, Ga., and entered business, but he did not prosper there, so he came here. He now operates a hat-cleaning, clothes-pressing, and shoe-shining business successfully. He owns his home, in one of the middle-class sections, and has a thousand-dollar automobile. About a year ago an automobile dealer came to him and urged him to trade in his old car on a new model. He offered John a generous allowance on the old car, but there was several hundred dollars difference. John said he did not want to trade, but the dealer was persistent, so John finally agreed to take the new car provided the dealer would flip a coin with him to see whether the difference in price was double or nothing. John was only half serious, and thought the dealer would leave him alone, but the dealer took him up, flipped the coin, lost, and delivered the new car to John in even exchange for the old one.
John is always ready to gamble, with cards, dice, anything. He also likes to drink, and a drunken card game once nearly cost him his life. There were five men in the game, two Greeks and three Americans, and all were drinking. There was a dispute between John and one of the Americans, and they fought. The American got hold of a knife, and before he could be stopped he slashed John a dozen times or more about the body and face. The abdominal wounds were so serious that several of the organs were actually hanging out when John, more dead than alive, was taken to a hospital, where 287 stitches were required to close the cuts. For many weeks no one could tell whether he would live or die, but the general belief was that he could not survive. When he began to recover, he told one of his friends that he was going to kill the American when he got out of the hospital. The American was warned, and he promptly left town. Five years later he returned, and John met him one night on the public square, quite unexpectedly. John pulled a revolver from his pocket, shot the American several times, and calmly surrendered to the police. For some six weeks the American lay between life and death, but he, too, recovered. John told the police he fired the shots in self-defense, and he was released on bond. When the American was able, he quietly left town again, and sent word back that he did not care to prosecute John, whereupon he was fully discharged. John declines to say whether or not he would shoot the American again if he had a chance.
He is not a regular drinker - that is, he doesn't drink every day - but when he starts he gets completely intoxicated, and usually after his sprees he must take a day or so off to recuperate. On rare occasions, while drunk, he gets in a belligerent mood, and has a fist fight, but usually he is mellow, and tries to sing. His companions are more often Americans than Greeks, and he belongs to one of the American fraternal orders. He does not belong to Ahepa, the only Greek lodge here. Except for drinking and gambling, he seems to have no amusements, unless short trips in the automobile with his wife and children are so considered.
(Real name, confidential: Asheville, N.C.) Writer - Douglas Garter
LIVING ON BUTTER AND EGGS
A Greek Sketch
Charlie came from somewhere in Russia, he said, but he cannot spell the name of the place, or pronounce it understandably. In fact, his English is so imperfect that the average American cannot understand him at all. He cannot read, and only recently did he learn to write figures when it became a business necessity. He makes his living by "writing butter-and-egg numbers," a petty "racket" known elsewhere as "policy" or "the numbers game." The daily receipts of butter and eggs at the Chicago Produce Exchange are used to determine the winning number, and if one wishes to try his luck he may look up Charlie, choose a number (any number from 000 to 999, inclusive), and place a bet that the chosen number will "come out" that day. The number is written on a slip, with the amount of the bet, which may be anything from 1? to $1, and a duplicate slip is turned in to the "banker" not less than one hour before the produce exchange releases the figures showing receipts of the preceding day. It is not a matter of guessing what the receipts were; the totals make no difference, but the winning number is determined by taking a certain digit from the butter receipts and combining it with two other digits taken from the egg receipts. If the "player" has selected the correct number, the banker, who stays very much in the background, pays Charlie an amount equal to 500 times the bet, and Charlie in turn pays the money to the player, less a commission of 10%. Thus, a bet of 10? will yield the player $45, net, if his number comes out. Charlie, in addition, is paid a commission of 20% of all bets turned in to the banker.
For years this racket, locally, has been operated by Greeks, but most of the "writers" and players are Negroes. Many have been arrested, convicted, and fined, and Charlie himself was arrested once, but was given a suspended sentence. He has no regular place of business, but he manages to subsist in a meager fashion, making the rounds of his customers each morning, suggesting numbers, writing slips, collecting bets. Most of his customers are Greeks, Italians, and Negroes, but some Americans play the game also.
Diminutive, dour, and wearing clothes that are spotted with food, and many sizes too large, Charlie plods a weary way, unshaved, apparently uninterested in his surroundings, and usually uncommunicative. He is noncommittal about his reasons for leaving Russia and coming to America, and he does not care to discuss his activities before coming here. However, he indicated that he came here from New York about 13 years ago. His family, if he has one, remains undisclosed, but he gets a letter from Greece about once a year. One of the other Greeks reads it to him.
Charlie plays the numbers himself, and once in a while he has the right combination. Today, though, he was very much irritated because the number came out 774 - he had played, among others, 775. The worthless slip was exhibited with violent and elaborate gestures, and a lengthy expostulation in his practically unintelligible mixture of Greek and English. He had played 25? on 775, so his winnings would have been considerable. He said, however, that he will "hit" tomorrow.
About 5 feet, 3 inches, Charlie weighs hardly 110 pounds. He is 58 years old, and his hair, once black, is graying. His dark eyes are set deeply in his leathery, wrinkled face, and he wears glasses that he bought at a chain store. A smile on his countenance is a rarity. He lives alone in a barnlike space on the second floor of a business building. His rent is negligible, and the owner of the place seldom bothers to collect it. He likes to have Charlie around at night as a precaution against prowlers, but a marauder would probably frighten Charlie nearly to death. His iron bed is piled high with dirty blankets, and there is no sign of a sheet or pillowcase. There is a sort of bathroom, but the tub appears to have been disused for years. Sometimes Charlie eats a meal at one of the Greek cafes, but usually he takes a bottle of milk, a loaf of bread, and some cheese or meat to his quarters. The empty bottles accumulate for months before they are removed (about 200 are in evidence now).
Charlie has no close friends, and does not seem to care for amusements or sports. He has not been inside a theater in more than 10 years. Aside from the butter-and-egg racket, his principal interest in life is the local baseball lottery. When he has the money, he buys a number of "baseball pool tickets," and spends the entire afternoon following the scores as they come in on the ticker and are posted on the scoreboard. His winnings, if any, are put into butter-and-egg numbers and more baseball tickets. Once, however, he saved some money and bought a small lot in a poor residential section, but the taxes, about $3 annually, are a great bother. He can never seem to get them paid. He does not have any idea what he is going to do with the lot, but he does not want to sell it. He hopes to win the Irish Sweepstakes someday.
North Carolina										Greek Study
Douglas Carter										Asheville, N.C.
"I learned the English language because I didn't like to wash dishes," said Joe Drosinis. "That was the only way I could get a better job. My brother was a clerk in the office of - what do you say? - oh, the public utility company. That's it: the public utility company. He said to me, 'Joe, if you learn English, I'll get you a good job.' I asked him, 'How long does it take to learn English?' 'About six months,' he said. 'You are a smart boy; you ought to learn it in six months.' So I had to wash dishes for six months more; but I learned it in six months, like he said.
"I got some books, and a dictionary, and I got all the English newspapers and magazines I could find, and I would look up each word in the dictionary. My brother helped me with the verbs. He said the three most important verbs in English are 'I do,' 'I have,' and 'I am.' He said, 'That's the foundation for learning English.' So I started with those three verbs. It wasn't easy, either. Of course I had been through school in Greece - grammar school - and I knew something about verbs, and nouns, and so on, but that six months was the hardest I ever spent in my life.
"After I got started, my brother borrowed a typewriter, and I learned typing. He said, 'Joe, you've got to learn typing if you want a good job.' So I learned the touch system. I learned it good, too. It's been a long time now since I've typed, but I'll bet it would come back to me quick if I had to use a typewriter again.
"My people lived in Laconia Department - that's something like a state over here - near Sparta, the capital. My father had a farm, and that's why I didn't know how to do anything but wash dishes when I got to Egypt. I had never done anything but farm work. I could plow, and hoe, and so on, but that's all I knew how to do, so my brother got me a job washing dishes. You don't have to learn how to do that; you just have to be careful. If you break a dish, they take it out of your pay, so I didn't break any.
"When my father died, my mother went to live with her brother, and took my sister with her. So I went to Egypt to Alexandria - to be with my older brother. I didn't like my uncle, and I didn't want to live in his house, so I told my mother I wanted to go to Alexandria, and she gave me the money. I was 17 years old, and I had never been away from home before. Oh, I had been to Sparta, of course, but not very far away from home. My mother is still living with my uncle."
Joe is 31 now, and very handsome. He works in a wine and beer store. His jet black hair is always well trimmed and neatly brushed, and his black eyes sparkle with intelligence. His about 5 feet, 6 inches, and weighs close to 170. His suits are well chosen, conservative, and neatly pressed. He usually wears white shirts, and his neckties are never loud. Somehow, his shoes always appear to be quite new. In general, he gives an impression of neatness, cleanliness, and culture. He is quiet and polite in manner, and very friendly. He continued:
"I never had any money before I left Greece; I didn't have any use for it. I had all I wanted right there at home. Money didn't mean a thing to me. My father was very good to us, and he was always bringing little things to us from Sparta. Those little things were all we wanted. You see? We were happy there. I didn't mind working on the farm; I liked it. We lived what you call the simple life, and we were contented. I didn't have any ambition then. Hard work kept my mind occupied, and the few pleasures we had were enough for me. I was very homesick for about a year in Alexandria, but then I began to be ambitious. (Said with a big grin.)
"I wanted good clothes, and more money, and I was tired of washing dishes. But look at me now! (He was washing glasses) My business failed - perhaps I should say I failed in business - but I'll get another start sometime, and I won't fail again. I just got a little bit too ambitious, that's all; but I'll tell you about that. I was talking about Alexandria.
"Did you ever see a louse that gets down under your skin? It isn't really a louse, but it looks like one. I don't remember what they call them over there. You wouldn't hardly believe it - I didn't believe it when they told me about it - but this little louse bored down in your skin and lays eggs, and you don't know it until the eggs hatch. Then you have a slight swelling, and it begins to itch, and you have to go to someone who knows how to cut all that stuff out. It's painful, too - in fact, it hurts like hell! I had plenty of 'em. There wasn't any way to help it that I could find out. Every three or four months I would get some of those things, and have to have 'em cut out. That's one reason I left Egypt and went to the Sudan - the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. They told me those lice wouldn't get on you down there, and they didn't.
"Well, after I learned English and typing, I was ready for my brother to get me a good job, but he couldn't find a place for me. I was disgusted. You see, I could read and write English, but I couldn't speak it. I just couldn't pronounce the words. I knew the words, but I couldn't say 'em, and I couldn't understand 'em when they were said to me. I could talk English a little bit with another Greek, but I couldn't talk with an Englishman or American; so nobody would hire me.
"Then one day I saw a notice that the government would give an examination for a typist. I went to the examination, and there were about 50 Greek boys there - that is, most of them were Greek boys - and they only wanted one typist. Those other boys had been to English school, too, and they could all speak English - good. But I was lucky: it didn't seem to make much difference whether you could talk in English or not; they wanted somebody who could type good. Everybody was given something to copy, and we all started. Some of those boys couldn't type at all; they used just one finger, or two, like this (indicating), and they would stop and hunt for a letter (laughter).
"The man who gave the examination was going around the room looking over your shoulder at your work, and soon he came to me. He said, 'What's your name?' I could understand that, so I told him. Then he said something else that I couldn't understand, and started out. The other boys stopped typing and began to get up, but I just sat there, trying to figure out what it was he said. He stopped at the door and looked back at me, and said something else I couldn't understand. I turned to the boy nearest me, and said in Greek, 'What did he say?' The boy said, 'He told you to follow him. He's giving you the job. He said you'll do.' (More laughter.)
"So that was my first good job. But what about that: I got the job over 50 other boys, and couldn't even understand the man when he gave it to me! I gradually learned how to speak English, though, and understand it, but my accent is not so good yet. It worries me. What's the matter with my accent? I try hard, but sometimes I have to say a word three or four times before it sounds right.
"All my work was copying: I sat there at the typewriter and copied things all day long. It got tiresome, but I was making good money, and I was learning things fast. I had enough money to buy good clothes and good food, and I could go down to the beach and have a good time. All kinds of people went to that beach - people from all over the world -and I had the best time of my life there.
"After a time, I began to look around for a better job, and I got one with, a bank, By that time I had learned to speak a little French and a little Arabic, and it helped me a lot. I didn't go around any Italians, much, and didn't get a chance to learn their language, but in Egypt you are all right if you can speak Greek, English, French, and Arabic. The Greeks didn't associate with the natives - socially, I mean - but you were always coming in contact with them, and you couldn't keep from learning a little bit of their language.
"My brother and I had an apartment together - he wasn't married - but he is 10 years older than I am, and I never did go around with him very much. He had his friends, and I had mine, I went with Greeks, some French people, and some English people, mostly. Everybody was very friendly, and I got along fine, but when I got a chance to go to the Sudan, I grabbed it quick. For one thing, I got a better salary, and I began to save my money. I was at Khartoum, where the Blue Nile and the White Nile come together. I liked it all right in the Sudan, but I had more fun in Alexandria.
"Later, they offered me a job as manager of a branch bank in Ethiopia, and I would get more pay, so I took it. I went there by boat on the Blue Nile, and I wouldn't have thought that a boat could go so slow. Of course, we were going upstream, and we stopped at every little town, but you won't believe it when I tell you it took a month to go from Khartoum to Ethiopia. It did, though.
"I didn't like it there, and I began to think about going somewhere else. I had some friends in America, and soon I made up my mind to take a long vacation and go to New York. I had saved a lot of money, but I decided to save some more, so I stayed in Ethiopia more than a year.
"There was an American church mission there, and while I was there they sent a new doctor to the hospital. I don't know what church it was - I've forgotten - but all their stuff came from Philadelphia. Do you know? Philadelphia seemed to be their headquarters. Anyhow, by that time I thought I could speak English pretty good, but when I met that doctor he talked to me through his nose, like this (imitating; then laughter). I said to myself, 'Do I know how to speak English, or not?' I couldn't understand anything he said! But before I left I got to where I could talk to him all right. He sure did carve up those natives, though. He was no surgeon, and I'm not sure that he was even a doctor. As far as I could tell, everybody died that went in that hospital after he got there, Maybe he was just experimenting. The bank was right across the street from the hospital, and the yells and screams of the natives in there just about got my goat. Then they wanted everybody to be vaccinated for something, and that doctor was doing it, but I said, 'No! He'll never touch me. I'm not ready to die yet.' So one of the nurses vaccinated me.
"When I got ready to take my vacation I met up with an Englishman and his wife who were going in my direction, and later we joined an Italian and his wife. The five of us traveled together, sharing expenses equally. We went by boat to Khartoum, then by train to Alexandria, where we took a ship to Syria. We went through Asia Minor, visited the islands, and then to Athens. I didn't go by my old home, and I haven't seen it since I left. I don't suppose I'll ever go back, now. From Athens we went to Italy: Rome, Naples, Milan, Genoa; then through Switzerland and Franco to England, where the party broke up.
"France was the dirtiest country I ever saw. Switzerland and Italy were clean and neat, but Franco was terrible. I certainly was surprised. I had a different notion of the country entirely. I don't ever want to go back there.
"From England I sailed to New York, and visited my friends there. One of them was coming to Asheville on business, and I came with him. I liked it here, and I've been here ever since. There was a nice little cafe business for sale, and my friend and I bought it. We did all right for awhile; business was good. I never did like the idea of selling liquor, though - bootlegging - but it seemed like everyone else was doing it, so we did, too. I'm not selling any now, however. The cops got a little too tough when the ABC-store election came up. I think they want the election to carry, and they have tried to dry up the town so that people who want liquor will vote for the stores. They raided this place four times in one week. They arrested me once; twice they didn't find anything, and the other time they arrested my boss. They fined me $50 and the costs, and my boss had to pay $350. That settled us for a while; we decided to quit until after the election. I don't know what we'll do then. We might go back to selling it, and we might not. Some of the places are selling it right on, though.
"But I didn't tell you about the cafe, did I? Well, we got a little too ambitious, like I said a while ago; or rather I did. It was all my fault. I wanted to buy new fixtures and equipment, and remodel the place, inside and out. My partner talked against it, but I had my way in the end, and it broke us. We put all the money we had into it, and still owed a lot on the new stuff we bought. We just couldn't keep up the payments, that's all, and the company had a receiver appointed. They took back all the new stuff, and sold out the business. Another Greek bought it. He put in some second-hand stuff, and he's doing fairly well, it seems. I've been working here ever since. I don't make much, but I'm getting my debts paid, and before long I'll be able to save a little.
"I married an American girl, you know. She was a waitress in the cafe. I don't know how it happened, exactly; we just fell in love, I guess. I don't have any children yet, but there's one on the way. It'll be here in about four months, I think. That will run my expenses up, and I might have to start selling liquor again whether I want to or not. I've got to have enough money to take care of that baby!
"We live in west Asheville, in a rented house, but someday I intend to build or buy a home. Now that I'm married, with a baby coming, I've given up any thought of going back to Egypt. My wife's people are here, and-she likes Asheville, so this is my home - permanently. I've got a lot of friends here, and everything suits me fine, except I'm not making enough money. I'm going to do something about that, though.
"My hours here are so long that we don't get a chance to go out very much together, but my wife is always flying around to some party, or tea, or something. She does enough running around for both of us. I don't care much for it, anyhow. I don't even belong to a lodge. Most of the Greeks here belong to Ahepa - you know what that is, don't you? - or one of the American lodges, but I haven't got time to fool with anything like that, Sometimes I go visiting with my wife - usually to see some of her American friends - but it's not very often. All of her friends are very nice, though, and I like them. They treat me just as though I were American, myself.
