Approximately 2800 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA FEDERAL WRITERS' PROJECT
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.
LIFE HISTORY.
TITLE:
"SMALL TOWN DOCTOR"
Date of First writing	February 18, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	L. M. Mitchell, M. D.
Place	Batesburg, S. C.
Occupation	Medical Doctor, Surgeon
Fictitious Name	Dr. Cameron
Name of Writer	F. Donald Atwell
Name of Reviser	State office.
LIFE HISTORY.
Project #-1655
F. Donald Atwell
Charleston, S. C.
February 18, 1939
"SMALL TOWN DOCTOR".
He maintains a musty, ethery little office right next to Williams Livery Stable on a back street at home. Two ratty chairs and an ancient golden oak table are the only furnishings of the reception room - a bare walled cavern with a damp cement floor. An unbleached muslin curtain, fly-specked and gummy with age, serves as a partition between the reception room and the inner sanctum. The latter, a mere cubby-hole with swaying shelves holding dust covered bottles. A human skull on a sagging shelf in the rear grins at you as you enter.
Behind a scarred desk of ancient vintage, piled high with books, medicinal samples, and huge jars of alcohol containing everything from a two-months foetus to an enlarged appendix, sits a dried up specimen more gruesome looking than anything preserved in alcohol. His face is pinched and haggard, and his nappy clothes reek of pills, ether, and stale tobacco.
He rises unsteadily as I approach. His entire bearing is that of an old man who has lain in a dust covered casket for years.
"You will pardon Doctor a moment?" his voice rasps, "Must call on Charlie and get a half-pint. Don't have fifty cents on you by chance, have you mister?"
He doesn't even recognize me. Yet, it has been a long time. I extend the coin, and his bony, claw-like hand closes over it greedily. "Just make yourself comfortable, Doctor will be back presently." He shuffles out, blinking at the sunlight in the front office like a rat coming out of its dark hide-out. He is all that is left of what was once Batesburg's leading physician and surgeon.
His life story starts twenty years ago in Batesburg, S. C. It is a small town of acme twenty-five hundred population, with neat homes, a conventional Main Street, and a "mill hill" - the latter, a village in its own right.
A small boy rushes into Johnson's Drug Store on the corner of Main for an ice-cream, only to find himself in the midst of a heated argument between a dressed up individual and the druggist.
"By God! Johnson, you mean to tell me you'll set up a bunch of fops to sodas and yet won't fill that prescription for old man Hartley. I can't believe it!"
Dr. Johnson, the druggist, a wizened little man with the beady eyes of a snake, snarls back, "Listen here, Cameron, I'm in the drug business to make money. If I fill prescriptions for every sorry no count Tom. Dick, and Harry in this town, why, I'd go busted, just like you're going doctoring everybody for nothing!"
The nice looking man with the anger in his eyes, snatches his little back bag and whirls about to leave the store. "Fill that prescription!" He planks a bill on the fountain counter and leaves.
That was my first encounter with the new doctor from "up North" who had chosen to cast his lot with us small-town folks. And did the town hum with gossip about Dr. Cameron! Forty-five, they said, an eligible bachelor, and handsome in the bargain.
I saw the new doctor again for the second time at the graduation exercises in the Grammar School auditorium. He was a grand looking man with a high forehead, coal black hair, and eyes that stared everyone out of countenance. With him that night was Miss Alice Beery, my fifth grade teacher. Miss Beery had long ago become a legend in our town. She was thirty or better, but she was still sweet and winsome and pretty. She didn't look like an old maid to me. Half the boys in school dreamed of growing up, becoming president, and making Miss Alice first lady of the land.
"Doc" must have had similar idea, because he chose her out of all the women in town. I watched closely when she laid her head on his shoulder, not minding the people around her, and I knew that after all these years Miss Beery's knight had come. Even if he didn't arrive on a dashing white charger, at least he came riding. His Model T. Ford was a familiar sight in town. The auditorium buzzed when Miss Alice rested her head on her man's shoulder, while he stared the gossip-mongers down.
It soon became apparent that people didn't die if "Doc" Cameron attended them. A saying sprung up around town that when Doc stepped in, Death stepped out!
It became his slogan.
One morning in the seventh grade arithmatic room, I was taken ill. My heart began to pump heavily, and my face started burning up. I got weak as a kitten. Miss Beery looked at me sharply, and said, Donald, you may go home now, if you like."
When I reached home I was one sick boy. My mother rushed to the telephone to call Dr. Thomas, better known to us boys as "Old Sawbones." He was a tall, lanky, sour-faced man who always reminded me of how I thought an undertaker should look! He certainly had the funeral manner.
"Naw you don't Ma!" I hollered at her, "I want that new doctor!"
"But Donald, we've had Dr. Thomas ever since. . . . . ."
"I don't care! I want Doc Cameron, I'm sick, and I might die, and then you'd be sorry you didn't get the doctor I wanted."
It worked. I heard my mother fairly scream over the phone to the operator.
"Mabel!" Mabel was 'Central' in those days, and knew everyone in town. "Mabel, ring Dr. Cameron's office - hurry! Donald came home a moment ago from school deathly ill. Oh, please hurry, please!"
It was only a matter of minutes before the familiar rattle of Doc's Model T. sounded cut front. It choked down, coughed, there came the sound of a door being slammed. Doc rushed into the room and up to my bed.
"By God! I thought somebody was dying here, judging from the way Mabel carried on over the phone." He stuck his hand out and grinned, "hiah son, I'm Doc Cameron. We're going to be friends.... the very best of friends, aren't we, my boy?" I took his hand, and he added, "here, open your trap." I became, at that moment, Doc's friend for life. While he was taking my temperature he turned to my mother.
"Got any whiskey in the house, Madam ?"
"But surely, Doctor, you're not going to give the child whiskey?"
"Hells Bells No, Madam! The whiskey's for me!" I knew Mother regretted calling Doc Cameron. But it wasn't but a few minutes before he had her smiling back at him. Doc was that way. I learned later that he took Mother aside and informed her in no uncertain terms that she had a serious ease of typhoid fever on her hands, and that careful treatment was the only thing that would pull me through. Even today, I have faint recollections of his kindly face bending over mo in the night.
I learned later that he had stayed up three nights straight with me. He wouldn't go home. They told me he had said: "I'm not losing this boy. I'll pull him through some way till midnight, and his fever will break. It's the crisis. He'll be O. K. then.
"My mother, worried to death, had tried to get him to lie down and rest, but he wouldn't leave my bedside even for a moment. "Must watch every small development" he had said.
He cancelled all calls except emergency ones. And, he didn't have any of those kind While he was attending me in the most serious illness I had known. One call was persistent, but he had "cussed out" the party doing the calling, and lost a patient. "Pampered Mrs. Jones, always imagining there's something wrong with herself!" Doc had snorted. "Ought to give her a dose of strychnine for calling like this."
"Doc" never called, and then sat down to be waited on. If he wanted anything in the kitchen or bathroom, ha want in for it himself, and if he couldn't find it, he asked somebody to get it for him. If he happened in at meal time, and he would often drop in to see how we were, he'd alt down, start eating and talk up a storm.
"That dammed Thomas, nearly killed a woman today. Nearly dead When they called me. I found her swelled up bigger'n a balloon. Thomas gave her a hypo to ease her. Can you imagine! If I'd been ten minutes longer, why she'd been dead. Thomas oughta be a horse doctor. No, he'd kill the poor horse!"
Soon the news spread around town that he had married Miss Beery.
We boys had a grand time serenading the couple when they returned from a two-weeks honeymoon. We got hold of some old mill saws, and beat on them with axes. You could have heard them ten miles. It sort of compensated for the loss of Miss Alice.
I shall never forget how "Doc" looked when he stuck his head out of an upstairs window. A lot of cars had backed in the ditch in front of the house, and turned their headlights on.
He laughed and waved. His pretty bride joined him at the window, and her eyes sparkled in the glare of the headlights.
After that "Doc" just became more popular than ever. He was elected mayor, chairman of the Medical Society, a member of every major delegation.
With the suddeness of lightning, the storm broke around "Doc's" head. It seemed that some poor devil had come in the night begging dope. He was really an ill man, and was trying to get to a hospital in Columbia. "Doc" gave him a shot, a little to ease him on the way, and his railroad fare.
Every doctor in town - and there were three - set up a wall. Doctor Cameron was asked to resign from the county medical association. Then the American Medical Association fired him for giving that man dope to carry with him. Bat "Doc" didn't seem to mind. He laughed at them all, and his patients seemed to increase. He still had a fine office up over the First National Bank. His wife stuck by him.
But people he had helped turned against him. There were sinister whisperings about unethical practices of all kinds. Ridiculous charges that were accepted greedily by those he had helped most. My mother took up for him. She told the gossip mongers that they had better shut up about the finest doctor that had ever come to our town. Mother scored Old lady Nones at the Missionary meeting one afternoon. She told her to pay "Doc" What she owed him, and then "run him down".
Doc and Miss Beery kept right on like they always had. Miss Beery continued to sing in the Methodist Church Choir. "Doc" would just sit in the front of the congregation and grin up at her. He always slept through the sermons. Old Mr. MaHaffey would always slam the Bible shut loud enough to wake up the dead, much less Doc. It was the signal that the sermon was coming to a close.
The woman of the church were going on some kind of trip as delegates to a convention and Doc's wife went along. She drove her own car. But she never drove it back. A drunk hit her head on just outside of Allendale. The women riding with her were seriously injured, but she was the only one, strangely enough; who succumbed to her injuries.
It was the last straw. I remember how hashed everything was in town the night they brought her back. I had started to the Broadway Movie Palace up-town, but changed my mind and crossed over to Johnson's Drug Store. "Doc" was sitting at one of the tables with his head in his hands. He didn't look up when I entered. Dr. Johnson came over to him and placed his arm about Doc's shoulders. For the first time in my life, I saw a gentle expression on the druggist's face.
"Cameron," he said, in a husky tone, "I've never particularly liked you - you know that. But tonight there's not a man in this town who feels your misfortune more than I do at this moment. If there is anything I can do, please feel free to call on me."
Doc collapsed at the graveside. Two friends lifted and carried him to a waiting automobile. It was at this time that we moved to Columbia.
I heard from "Doc" through friends from time to time. It seemed that after his wife died, he lacked the support and strength necessary to hold his own. He became slouchy in his appearance. He snarled back at those who accused him unjustly. He drank heavily. Later, came Morphine.
His downfall was swift and final after his wife's death. "Doe" was becoming an old man, an old man unable to fight back.
The screen door slams out front. Doc is returning. He shuffles in quietly with a bulge on his hip. He takes the bottle out of his pocket and begins tearing the cap off, peering intently at me the while.
"Your face. . . . . it is familiar." he saggs into his squeaky old office chair, "yessir, your face is familiar. . .. . "He drops his head on his chest, and speaks as though he were in a barrel. "I was too old to fight 'em back. Best Doctor this town ever saw, gave everything I had ..... and what reward did I get..... kicked down like a dog....." His eyes closed He becomes silent.
I lay a dollar on his desk and leave quietly.
*************************
Approximately 1250 words
SOUTH CAROLINA FEDERAL WRITERS PROJECT
TITLE: THE MAN WHO WAS -
Date of First Writing	February 1, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	H. L. Harper
Place	Charleston, S. C.
Address	264 King Street
Ficticious Name	John Remington
Name of Writer	F. Donald Atwell
Name of Reviser	State Office
Approximately 1250 Words
Projecy 1655
F. Donald Atwell,
Charleston, S.C.
February 1, 1939
Life History
THE MAN WHO WAS
I ran into him on the third floor (back) in a cheap rooming house on K Street-a one-eyed, disheveled remnant of a man nearing middle-age. His suit was worn and baggy, and his shirt looked as though it had not been laundered since it was bought.
"Touch you for a little sniffer. Buddy? His voice Wheezed. He leaned closer. "Been on a bounder for two days, trying to straighten up, need a little shot to brace me," he added by way of explanation.
" Okay" I said. "Let's drop in Joe's I'll just have a beer-off liquor for good."
With a stiff drink under his belt, my new acquaintance brightened. His hands became steady and his eye kindled with a new light. "Name's Remington - John Remington." He gazed at the table-top, and twirled his glass.
"All right," I said, "let's have it."
"It's a long story, Buddy."
"Let's have it." I said.
"Well, I was born on a farm up in Spartanburg County, 48 years ago. When I was fifteen, I left the farm and came to Spartanburg Where I got a job in a cotton mill there. Then came the war. I was hardly more than a kid, and I listened with my mouth open at those preachers prating on what a glorious thing it was to die for one's country, although I noticed later that none of them ever shouldered a gun.
I volunteered. We hadn't been over there two weeks before they pushed our outfit up to the front. It wasn't the fighting that got me. It was the horses. Yessic, Buddy, the horses. I just couldn't stand those awful screams and pitiful walls, of artillery horses shot to pieces out there and dying in agony. You could hear 'em out there panting and whining so pitifully. Buddy, it tore my nerves all to pieces.
"I got mine at Chateau Thierry. Thirty wounds, and gassed." Hero, Remington opened his shirt to prove his assertion. His chest was a mat of scars. "Just a part of 'em, Buddy, there's plenty more on my back." He buttoned his shirt and reaching in his pocket extracted a card and extended it to me. "There, that entitles me to all of $34 dollars a month for saving the world for democracy."
"At any rate, that's all I get. But somehow I can't cuss Roosevelt even if he did hold out on the Bonus. He's saved this country from revolution. That's certain even if people do call him a spendthrigt. Why, you know and I know in 1932 this country was well on the way to a civil war similar to that in Spain. Roosevelt did what he could, I suppose. He spent it, but he saved us. It's easy for 'em to cuss him now, but it's not settled yet. What'll happen when he goes out? I'm no politician although I vote. I'd vote for Roosevelt again, I guess, if he was to run.
But that's getting away from my story. When I came back to the states, everything seemed strange and different. I managed to get a job with the Southern Railway, firing. Then I ran local freight. Finally, I had a passenger ruh out of Hamlet. I was making a good salary. I averaged nearly three hundred a month. Then, I got married. Married a girl named Mamie Bouknight from Hamlet. Buddy, it was a case of adoration I suppose you'd call it. I worshipped the ground she walked on. All the mesa and horror of the war was behind me, and I was happy. Happy then, Buddy. Me nor Mamie either had had much in life, and we decided on a beautiful home in Hamlet to start us off. I got to where I'd spend every spare minute after my run, working around the place. Mamie would keep busy with her house and flowers, and I'd work the garden and fix things. I got where I loved to piddle in the house and outside. I was always building something, or fixing fences, and sowing lawns and a thousand other things.
"Those were the happiest years, Buddy, but it didn't last long. Mamie came in from uptown one day complaining of a pain in her side. By night, she was running a high fever and I was nearly crazy. I had the beat doctors in Spartanburg, told 'em not to mind the cost, just save her life. Old Dr. Wesson, who had been our family doctor, told me it wasn't a matter of expense, it was pneumonia.
"When she died, Buddy, it finished me. I never realized how much she really meant to me until she was gone. I used to go out to the cemetery on summer evenings and just sit on the green sod by her grave and talk to her. I'd tell her how beautiful the flowers were and how pretty the big magnolia blooms were in the magnolia tree over her grave.
"From then on, my health went down. I got worse and worse, and finally, I lost out with the railroad. I couldn't stand the stiff examination. I came on to Charleston, more by chance than anything else, and I nearly died from loneliness. I didn't have anything to do and I was miserable.
" I managed after a long time to get work clerking in a small grocery store down on B - street. It didn't pay anything hardly, but it kept me busy.
"Then they paid the bonus. I got about five hundred dollars, and a widow with one child at the same time. I had met her when she came in the store one morning, and I took a liking to her. It had been five years since Mamie died, and I felt that aha would want me to marry again. I dropped around occasionally to see this widow, and when I got my bonus, well, we got married.
"But Buddy, When that bonus money finally ran out, things changed. It went from bad to worse. It got so I couldn't come in the house.
If ever a man lived in hell with a woman, I did. I found out that she had spent two years in the Asylum in Columbia. She would suddenly have those mean, crazy spells of hers, and it nearly drove me crazy. I saw a lawyer about it, and he said quit her and get a divorce. I didn't have the money so we're still married, but I dont mess around there any. She got some kind of job with the WPA, I think. I did send a big order of groceries Christmas day, but they didn't invite me to dinner. All I had was a hamburger and a cup of coffee.
"I'm thinking about going down in Florida to live out the rest of it. I kinda look forward to the time when I'll go to Mamie, God rest her soul. I use to wonder if there was a heaven, but I know now if we live after we die, I want to go where she is, because where She is, well, it's got to be heaven.
I guess you'd just call me a man who was, because that's what I am. I just hope when I get with her that He'll give us a beautiful horns together where I can tinker again, and live like I did those few happy years that seem so long ago."
----------------------
Approximately 1950 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
CHARLESTON, S. C.
LIFE HISTORY.
TITLE
REGISTERED NURSE.
Date of First Writing	Jan. 20, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. John W. Conder
Fictitious Name	Mrs. Remington
Street Address	
Place
Fairwold, S. C. (Telegraph Station- Home of J. W. Conder Stockyards-five miles north of Columbia, S. C.
Occupation	Former Registered Nurse - Housewife.
Name of Writer	F. Donald Atwell
Name of Reviser	State Office
Project #-1655
F. Donald Atwell
Charleston, S. C.
January 31, 1939
LIFE HISTORY.
REGISTERED NURSE.
"Speaking of life histories," Mrs. Remington, an intelligent, pleasant mannered woman of middle-age said, "I've just returned from an automobile trip from my birthplace in Virginia Where I checked court records for my family history.
"I have also had a genealogical record compiled - covering both the Harris and Morton families. Harris on my father's side, and Morton on my mother's. I did this primarily for the cake of my daughter Elizabeth, eleven, whom I am sure will cherish such a record in years to come.
"My own life is really a most drab and uninteresting story. I was born fifty years ago in Lynchburg Virginia. My father, Edward Mason was a railroad engineer and his life was one round of hard work and little pay. In those days, engines burned wood and the cars were coupled with hand pins. There were no railroad brotherhoods, or laws governing working hours, and the salaries of employees were pitifully small. On his death, we were left absolutely destitute. That is the only word to describe our situation. There was only Mamma and myself, and she had to get out and try to make a living for us both. Women didn't go out and get jobs as they do today. It was a pathetic situation. Of course, relatives helped us, but most of our relatives were like ourselves - very poor.
"About this time, Mrs. Charles Stuart, my cousin whose husband had formerly worked on the road with my father, came up from c________ South Carolina where her husband had secured a good job as passenger conductor on the Southern Railway. Seeing how things were, she took us back to live with her. They had no children, and Mr. Stuart was making what was then an excellent salary for a railroad man.
"I attended school until I was sixteen, and Mrs. Stuart succeeded in getting me in the Old K_______ Hospital (Now the Baptist Hospital) in C_______ as a student nurse. Requirements for entrance were not strict, no high school diploma was necessary as it is today. Of course, I have supplemented my meager education with additional reading - I should say constant reading and study.
I could vouch for this as I glanced at row after row of bookcases filled with classic. On the mahogany table near my chair was Scribners, Time, Readers Digest, National Geographic, and even Fortune. Magazines were stacked on another table in the far corner of the room.
"Student nurses in those days had it so much harder than they do to-day." Mrs. Remington continued, "Like railroading, there were no laws governing the number of hours a nurse stayed on duty. I have been for 62 hours without taking off my shoes.
"Medicine and surgery in those days were painfully crude in comparison with to-day. In fact, the greatest progress in these two fields have been made in the last twenty-five years. The operating room of a quarter-centurs ago seems primitive when compared to the modernly equipped surgery. Where we had only two ordinary electric bulbs over a plain operating table, to-day, the modern surgeon has a battery of shadowless floodlights illuminating an operating table that personifies the epitome of modern mechanical genius. We administered anaesthetics by simply pouring the ether from the can on a gauze and applying it to the patients' nose. To-day there are high pressure tanks, gauges, and complicated equipment requiring skilled operators. Oxygen tanks, iron lungs, and all attendant paraphanalia of the present requires specialized knowledge. Yesterday we had only a can of other and a fervent hope that a life would be saved.
"Somehow, we really did save lives. Dr. King was one physician far in advance of his time. He stressed sanitation and surgical cleanliness at all times, and his hospital enjoyed phenominal growth. He had the reputation of having leas deaths by gangrene and childbed fever than any other hospital in the state. He was a remarkable man, good to his nurses, although he made them toe the mark, and they swore by him. He contributed much towards the efficiency and effectiveness of modern medicine by his example and precepts. In attribute my excellent training to his kindly discipline and exacting thoroughness.
"After graduation, I wanted to get an apartment and have Mamma with me. But in the meantime my cousin and her husband had moved to Batesburg, S. C., where her husband was conductor on the Short run to Parry. They carried Mamma with them. She wanted to wait until I had earned enough for us to live comfortably.
"She continued to live on with them however, not so much because she wanted to - she did most of the housework and earned what she got but because I wasn't making much nursing. Salaries of nurses in those days were very small. It was not until thirteen years ago when I was married to Mr. Remington, that Mamma came to live with me. She died three years ago, after having lived with us the last ten years of her life. I am so glad that she could spend her few remaining years in peace, contented in the knowledge that I was settled and happy. Too, she had the pleasure of her grandchild of whom she was very proud.
As a registered nurse, I handled all kinds of cases. I have served in wealthy homes, and in country shacks - I rendered my best in both places. I have often refused large sums of money to keep down scandals. I could have had many more dollars had I taken advantage of my position as a nurse.
"I recall, in particular, a case I had of this kind. The girl was of high school age, daughter of one of C________'s most prominent couples. The mother apparently was too obsessed with her innumerable social obligations to give her daughter the attention she needed. The father, a prominent broker, provided the one thing that most father's provide - money. But the companionship and guidance so sorely needed was absent. The girl became involved with a college boy of very undesirable character with the usual tragic results. The girl attempted to hide her condition from her teachers and her parents, finally resorting to drugs in a last frantic attempt to remedy her mistake. It wasn't until she was forced to bed, deathly ill and bleeding profusely, that the whole sordid story was revealed.
I had nursed her mother, on a former occasion, and she called me again. The physician and myself worked fast. We were particularly anxious to correct the girl's trouble without resorting to hospitalization. We succeeded. I refused a comfortable sum from her father, "to please keep this quiet"- explaining that my salary covered that feature. To-day that girl is married, with a splendid husband, and two lovely children. The secret rests with me, the physician and the parties concerned. It will never be known. No nurse who values her professional reputation will violate a confidence. Its sure death to a nursing career. A nurse sees all, hears all, knows all - and keeps a tight lip. Such nurses are never idle.
"One ease in particular I shall never forget. It was a young man, about 28 years old. I had been called in the night by Dr. Morton Who said! "Harris (All doctors called me Harris, and still do) "There's a young fellow in that shack beyond the mill,- You know, you nursed a case near there. He needs the best nurse he can got, and you're it. I'll tell you before you go - he's broke."
I was startled to find the young can not only highly intelligent but well-educated as well. But I was too busy to do much wondering about him. He grew steadily worse. Both the Doctor and myself did everything humanly possible but in vain. I was alone with him the night he died. It seemed an eternity. Outside it was storming, and I had to go out and cut wood for the fire. I found I could wield an axe with the beat of them. That was the most harrowing case I ever undertook. I was only twenty- five, and I guess I made a nurse's fatal mistake of-caring. I wanted so desperately for that man to live. Efforts to locate his relatives proved fruitless. The town buried him, but I have always wondered what dread secret he carried to the grave with him. 'He came of excellent family - no doubt of that. And his education must have been acquired abroad. He had something to conceal and he succeeded admirably.
Thirteen years ago (I was 37 and still single) I accepted a case in Bishopville, S. C.--The Blakes were prominent farm folk. I was called to nurse Mrs. Blake's mother - a cear old lady. I enjoyed the country life--- the excellent meals - the big white house under the ancient caks. They were extremely nice to me. It was there that I met Mr. Remington. A dignified man of middle age with a distinguished bearing that carried conviction. I learned from the Blakes' that he had lost his wife some four or five years before. Also, he had immense stockyard interests here at F------ ---, and that he was probably the most outstanding man in the state in his particular field.
His visits became more frequent, and I learned to admire him tremendously. Here I was, thirty-seven years old, having put the idea of marriage entirely out ot my head, falling in love with a man thirteen years my senior.
To make a long story short, the first thing I did after we were married was to exercise my perogative as a nurse. I made him go to the dentist - have all his teeth extracted after finding that they were poisoning his entire system. Then came his appendix. I instituted rules requiring him to rest an hour after dinner, business or no business. To regulate his diet and to get a full night's rest, every night. To-day he is sound as a dollar, and ha still obeys the rules set down for him in the beginning.
Mr. Remington's three sons by his first wife are all actively engaged in business with their father. Of his two daughters by his first wife, one is married and living in Blackville. The other is attending Winthrop College in Rock Hill.
Mr. Remington and I have only the one child, Elizabeth, who la now in the 8th grade. I really started her off right - kindergarten and Sunday School. I chose Trinity Church, not only because it la the wealthiest Church in the city, but also because it is the largest. I realized that aha would make valuable contacts, and would meet and associate with those beat fitted to assist her socially, spiritually, and morally. By attending this church she has superior religious and moral advantages that would be lacking in a smaller church. I'm afraid I'm practical minded even with my moral and spiritual life as well as my material life.
I take an active interest in farm women's activities, and serve occasionally as county chairman or in some other capacity so as to put the farm women's problem before the legislature and other political bodies. I have spoken on numerous occasions in both the legislature and senate.
As regards my methods of household management, I have my own drawing account which never exceeds one hundred dollars a month for all household expenses. Employees about the stock barns do all outside work in conjunction with their regular duties, so I have only the expanse of a cook and maid.
"I have every modern convenience and enjoy the social and material advantages that money can buy, But I still remember those former years - how can I forget - when I stood on my feet for countless hours by the bedside of some patient.
"Now, I can afford the best medical attention obtainable day nurses, night nurses, and specialists, should the need for them arise. When we do require such attention, as we occasionally do, I treat the nurse as an honored guest. Its hard on her at best, and the best for her is none too good.
"I ought to know - I used to be one."
Approximately 1300 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
BEEF STEW.
Date of First Writing	March 28, 1959
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. Arthur B. Owens
Fictitious Name	Mr. Arthur B. Myers
Street Address	213 King Street,
Place	Charleston, S. c.
Occupation	Bookkeeper
Name of Writer	A. D. Atwell
Name of Reviser	State Office.
Approximately 1300 Words.
Project #-1655
F. D. Atwell
Charleston, S. C.
March 28, 1939
BEEF STEW.
The cafeteria was alive with the customary noonday crowd of office workers. Every available table was taken. The walls were lined with men and women smoking, laughing, and all talking at once. The interior was blue with kitchen fames and tobacco smoke.
I wormed my way to a table at which sat a thin, emaciated white-collar worker whom I judged to be about thirty-five. Ho was picking absently at a bowl of beef stew, and he seemed unaware of his surroundings, I noted that there was nothing else before him except the stew and a glass of water. A rather meager meal, I thought.
"May I sit here?" I juggled my tray precariously as I had often seen Negro waiters do in cafes and restaurants.
"Why, yes, sure, sit down."
My companion didn't look up, but kept dwaddling at the contents of the bowl with his fork.
"Quite a crowd," I began, spreading my dishes before me, "Do you eat here regularly?" I couldn't help but note his tired expression, his shiny serge suit, with ragged cuffs.
"Why, yes, sure, I eat here regularly," came his tired rejoiner, hopeless as before, "yea, I eat here regularly."
"Say!" I made another desperate effort, "my name's Remington; newspaper man, and a one-time accountant, that is, until the depression floored me."
"Glad to make your acquaintance, Mr. Remington, my name's Myers. Arthur B. Myers. I'm a bookkeeper with a wholesale house down on Bay Street." Myers raised his head a fraction, attempted a weak smile, and dropped again. "I've sat on a high stool in the back office so long, I feel like Bob cratchit. The man I work for could sure pass for old Scrooge before Scrooge's redemption!"
We sat in silence for a moment. I gazed at my plate. He dwaddled at his stew. My companion without doubt seamed at that moment to be the moat depressed man on earth.
"Look here, Myers," I burst forth, "It's none of my business, but haven't you got a pretty heavy load on your mind?" I laid my knife and fork on my plate and looked at him. He galvanized into life.
"Worry! Disappointment! That's all I ever had!" He digressed suddenly, evidently pleased with the opportunity to pour out his troubles to a sympathetic listener. "I'll tell you, Mr. Remington,
I just can't seem to come out of the rod, no matter how hard I try." Myers paused and frowned, "it's Mrs. Myers. Her health hasn't been so good. Fact is, she's been in bad health ever since I got this better job with the wholesale firm. Three years ago, I had saved eight hundred dollars to buy a little farm over on the Mount Pleasant side, when Mrs. Myers nerves went back on her. Doctor said she needed a change of environment. So, I sent her up to visit some relatives in Maine, and it certainly cut into my little savings. But it was worth it, because she seemed much better when she returned. I think buying that fur cost while she was up there boosted her morale a lot.
Well, everything was fine for about six months and then she began complaining of her stomach. I had saved four hundred by skimping and denying myself even the comforts and necessities. Of course, Mrs. Myers went to the beauty parlor, and that cost quite a bit, but I always liked for her to look her best.
"She went from one doctor to another, but apparently none of them did her any good. I didn't mind the bills so much, but I hated to miss out on the fishing trip the boys at the office had planned for months ahead. But as Mrs. Myers said, a trip like that would cost something, and we couldn't afford to throw away a cent with Mrs. Myers health in the Shape it was in."
Here, Myers shoulders dropped further, and I thought I detected a despondent sigh. Then he brightened momentarily. He continued! "Mrs. Myers perked up some after that, and I felt sure we were going to come out on top when her feet began giving her trouble. Some of her girl-friends were going to White Sulphur, and suggested that she accompany them. I felt that the baths might turn the trick, and they did. Of course, I had to cut down again on my expenses. I needed some clothes and I've been having sharp pains in my chest, but I had set my heart on that little place across the river where I could work out in the fresh air and sunshine, so I just strained a point to do without any-thing I just didn't have to have.
"The trip worked wonders all right, and I was just about to the place where I could start talking with the real estate man, when Mrs. Myers got down again. She felt that if she could spend the winter with some friends in Miami she would feel better.
"I couldn't get away from the office, so I sent her on alone. But it sure cost a lot to spend the winter in Florida. I've found that out. Mrs. Myers wrote me that the horse racing was ex- citing, and that she had won 1500 dollars on one horse and lost it on another. I sure wish she had sent that fifteen hundred back, or brought it on home. I could have almost paid for that place with that much. But Mrs. Myers always did like excitement. Always seemed to do her good. Of course, I had to cancel my plans to take the place, and it hurt because I certainly had my heart set on it that time."
Again, Myers head dropped. He lifted a forkful of stew ale most to his mouth, then let it drop back.
"Seems like I'm not hungry anymore, sort of lost my appetite." He sat quiet for a moment studying, then, "If only Mrs. Myers could hold up a few months longer, then I could get that little place and we could be out in the fresh air and sunshine, and I could work in my garden in the evenings when I come home from the office. I always wanted a home. We live in a little apartment up on Broad street, but I get my breakfast at Joe's Place, just a hot dog or a cup of coffee. You see its hard on Mrs. Myers to have to get up and fix breakfast, especially when she doesn't get to sleep until so late at nights She listens to the radio and reads until midnight. Says she's nervous and can't sleep. So I never bother her in the mornings, but just get up and go out quietly so as not to disturb her."
Myers glanced up and rose from his chair, a bit unsteadily I thought. He fumbled in his pockets a moment and turned red. "Haven't a cigarette have you, Mister Remington? I .....er ....sort of had to out down on smoking, the expense and all." He flushed painfully as he took the proffered cigarette and mumbled an embarrassed thanks. Turning he glanced towards the street.
"Oh, here comes Mrs. Myers now," he said, "She always drops in town for the matinee. Says it soothes her nerves to sit in a theater for a couple of hours each day."
"I want you to meet Mrs. Myers, Mr. Remington. He introduced us. She's looking much better now. I just hope that she'll continue. Maybe, if everything comes along all right, I can make a substantial down-payment on that place by fall. I certainly hope so."
Mrs. Myers flounced up to her stoop-shouldered husband with an alacrity that spelled anything but ill-health. She was a florid blond with defiant eyes.
"Arthur, you know it racks my nerves to be kept waiting! I told you distinctly that I would meet you at kresses at one o'clock. You just simply try to worry me." She snatched Myers by the arm and propelled him out the door in a manner worthy of a saloon bouncer. I was loft standing, my napkin in my collar, a knife in my hand, and a dinner untouched before me.
It was some little time before I saw Myers again. But one day I entered the cafeteria at the noon hour and glanced about, half hoping I would see him. I did. At a table against the wall sat the stooped, dejected figure with the beef stew. I rushed to his table.
"Well! Well! If it isn't Myers! How are you? Say, I'm glad to see you looking so much better!"" But my salutation fell flat. I was astounded to see the change in him. His face had shrunken and the cheek bones stood out frightfully. His skin had that sallow, fish-belly color that spoke T. B. better than any diagnosis. He coughed as he looked up.
"Hello, Remington. Glad to see you. Sit down." He attempted a smile, but it was a half-hearted effort. He coughed again and put his hand to his chest. "Hurts something awful," he said in a husky tone, "I ought to go see a doctor, but it cost so much especially since Mrs. Myers has had a relapse?
"What again!" "Myers, look here. You go to a doctor in the morning end let him look you over."
"Oh, I'd be alright if I could get out in the sunshine and fresh air, like we were talking about. But I don't see now how I'm going to be able to do it. Mrs. Myers has been having awful pains, and I'm afraid I'm going to have to send her to Baltimore to John Hopkins. She is rather delicate, Mrs. Myers is, Mr. Remington. I had often thought that she night improve if she had a child. I love children," This almost wistfully, "I really do. But of course, that's out of the question now. Mrs. Myers says it was terrible of me to ever think of such a thing considering her health and condition. But I think children sort of make life worth living, don't you, Mr. Remington?"