Approximately 2,525 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: TOM BIRD
Date of First Writing	February 10, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. George Tanner
Fictitious Name	Ton Bird
Address	Highway 175, Rural
Place	Marion County
Occupation	Tenant Farmer
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Project #3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, B.C.
Feb. 10, 1939
TOM BIRD
(white)
MARION COUNTY
(Rural)
SOUTH CARRLINA
In sight of the crossroads of Highway No. 175 and Highway No. 502, three miles from the town of Marion, stands a four-room, unpainted, tenant house, which has been built in the midst of open fields. Tom Bird and his wife, Miranda, have lived on this fifteen-acre farm for the past seven years and have managed to make a fair living by sharecropping their money crop with the owner of the land.
Seldom may one pass this little home during the winter months that they cannot glimpse a curl of smoke disappearing into the air from one of the chimneys. Miranda Bird is quite deaf and can count her yearly visits on her fingers, while her husband leaves home only to attend to some necessary business or to chat with some of his country friends or neighbors about the times.
As one nears the little dwelling, it is impossible to overlook the fact that some careful hands have recently swept the yard about the house nicely. A few rose bushes grow at scattered places about the front yard, while a couple of large oak trees shade the tiny back porch. Bright pink frilled curtains adorn the windows of the two front rooms and within the house, everything is in perfect order. Two bedrooms, furnished with highly polished furniture, stretch across the front of the house and behind these extend the kitchen and dining room. The house is lighted by kerosene oil lamps and a pump, standing on the end of the back porch, supplies all the water used in the home. Everything about the place gives the appearance of humble, yet thrifty living, showing that Tom Bird and his wife make the best of the little they have.
After rapping several times at the front door of the house, the door was slowly opened and from behind it stood a little old woman with tiny grey eyes, which looked up anxiously from beneath an old time sunbonnet. Without hesitating a moment, Miranda Bird explained that she was hard of hearing and could not talk to me herself, but that I might step into the next room and talk to her husband, who was just back from the hospital. Tom Bird had been operated on a few weeks before for the removal of a stone from his kidney. Dressed in a heavy brown shirt, he was lying in bed mainly from weakness. He seemed anxious to have company and insisted that I sit by the bed and talk awhile.
'No'm, I'm just suffering from weakness, that's all," said Tom Bird. "I'm glad you've come for I've been wishing somebody would drop in and sit with me a spell. It don't worry me none to talk and me and my wife have 'bout talked all we know. I suffered torture for seven years with a stone in my kidney till I went over to Florence 'bout three weeks ago and got operated on. That operation done me so much good, I'm 'bout to believe all doctors are good people now. Yes'm, I'm 'bout to believe that we couldn't live without them. I got to where I was so poorly and no-count, I wasn't worth nothing, but I feel a lot better now. It looks like doctor's prices runs high, but don't reckon we ought to grumble being they have such a lot of expense to carry on. I stayed in the hospital eleven days and it cost me $35.75. That looks high, but I wouldn't be back in my old shape for the same money and right smart of difference.
"Yes'm, my father was a farmer and that's what I've always been. I was born and raised down on Big Pee Dee Swamp in Marion County. I've done a little other work catching jobs in short times, but I've stuck to farming mostly and that's good a life anybody wants, I think. Cose I'm sixty-seven years old now and getting so old and poorly that if I could find something easier to do, I might like it better.
"I've sho' had to work hard for all what's come to me ever since I got big enough, to handle a hoe. My mother died when I was a infant, and I lost my father when I was 'bout twelve-year old. At that time, wasn't but me one left, for my step-mother taken my half brother and went to Columbia to live. I was forced to get out and hunt my own way of getting along, so I stayed from house to house and worked like a dog for other people. You see, when I was coming up, children that lost their parents had to take it rough or tumble - worked for what I got to eat and a little something to wear. Cose the people I stayed with was good to me, but I had to do as they said do and make out on what they chose to give me. In those days, I didn't know nothing 'bout no money. I remember the first twenty-five cents I ever got; know how I come of it. Man come down in the river swamp to run some timber off and give me twenty- five cents to tend his stock while he was down there. Thought I had some money with that quarter in my pocket. I'll tell you.
"No, I don't remember of ever going to school a day since I've been born; didn't knew nothing 'bout there was such as a school in my young days. But education's sho' a good thing and something everybody ought to have. I feel like I've missed halt my share in life not knowing no learning. Ain't learned my A.B.C's yet and can't fig're no count coming up. For instance, a man that don't know a fig're, don't never know what to do or how he's done. If I hadn't been blessed with such a good mother wit, I don't know how I would've done, but I got my portion of that. My wife, who tends to my fig'ring mostly and after my three daughters got up, they helped me out till they all got married and left us. I sent my children to that big school in Marion, but all of them quit school and married while they wasn't no more than kids. I wish they'd gone on and finished, but people makes mistakes that they can't see till it's too late. Didn't none of them think they'd need a education, but there ain't nothing amiss getting one 'cause that's something can't nobody take away from you. My youngest daughter, her husband died last June and she sho' needs her learning to take care of herself and her six-year-old youngun. Thought when she quit school and got married she was fixed, but She's got to get out and make them a living now and can't find nothing to do what ain't calling for a education. Cose some people have so little sense till if they gets a little learning, they think they know it all.
"I worked around for other people till I got married and that's been 'bout forty years ago, being I'm sixty-seven years old now. The first year we was married, I sharecropped a little piece of land down next Pee Dee, so as to get something to give me a start. You see, I was set out in the world with nowhere to lay my head and nothing to do with, but folks was good to help us along till we could get a little ourselves. The second year we was married, I rented twenty-five acres of land for $50.00 and rented a twenty-two acre farm the next year for a dollar and a quarter a acre. Both places been over next Pee Dee Swamp. We made pretty good them first two years, but lost 'bout everything that last one and had to start all over new. We was living down on the river's swamp and the fresh water come up in August and drowned everything we had. At that time, I was so down and out that I just worked around here and yonder for what I could get four or five years. But I couldn't make no headway in that line, so I moved over on Mr. Foxworth's place and sharecropped a couple of years to get me another start. After that, I moved up on Sheriff Blue's place, where we lived something like twelve years. I worked on Mr. Blue's plantation three years for fifty cents a day along with a little extra land to tend for my own - planted a garden, little potatoes, corn, and such as that. And when there wasn't much to do on the farm, I worked on the railroad shoveling for ninety cents a day. Then I worked in the timber woods sometimes a little along and along and drawed a dollar a day for that. Them odd jobs fitted in mighty well in short times, too. I'm here to tell you. We just rented clean out them last nine years we lived on Mr. Blue's place and spent our money like we pleased. We didn't make no money crop then but cotton, something like four or five bales a year, and it never brought but five cents a pound. Still we got along pretty well to Sheriff Blue's place 'cause we made what rations we needed mostly. That's where my children got most of their raising.
"After the old sheriff died and all my Children married off, me and my wife thought we could do better trying a little share- cropping again, well, we got word that a man wanted somebody to run his fifteen-acre farm over here on shares, so we made up with him to move on this place. The man what owns this place, he furnishes the land, the manure, the house we live in, and that big corn barn out there, while I puts in all the work and carries the crop on my one horse for half what money crop we make. It used to be I farmed the whole outfit for half the crop, even the potatoes, but that didn't noways make enough for us to get along on. Cose our corn land, that's always been ours.
"I don't know exactly what I make on this land, but I've a pretty good idea of what it comes to. I made something like $500.00 money crop last year, including tobacco and cotton, but cose that had to be divided half with the other man. Then I know I raised 125 bushels of corn and I think that will be just bare enough to carry us through. Made 'bout fourteen bushels of potatoes in all, 'bout enough to run us to spring, I reckon. Potatoes will sho' surprise you though - might think you've got a lot, but when they's measured up, seems like there ain't none hardly. We have 'bout twenty head of chickens and four hogs what I raises mostly for home use. Always try to have a little hogs, so as to eat a little hog and hominy as the old saying is. We sell a right smart of eggs along and along and have a nice gentle cow that furnishes us in silk and butter. I wish we could raise turkeys and guineas, but we can't keep them here because of living so close to the highway, we can't watch them all the time and they will wander put on the read and get run over. Yes'm, we commonly uses what we makes a year on this place for what we're obliged to get.
'Like all these farmers 'bout here, I don't plant much money crop these days because of all this government control. It looks like it ain't right to what we've been raised, planting what cotton and tobacco we pleased, but still it ain't near like it used to be. Yes'm, I'd rather have tobacco control myself for it gives us poor farmers a better chance, but it ain't all dealt right. I believes in some of this farmer business if they'd treat everybody right. I'd rather have government contracts. But some gets more acres to plant than others and that just ain't fair. I think everybody ought to get so many acres to the horse. Said that time the racket of it started.
'I'll tell you what's my opinion of this government 'lief work, too, if you want to hear it. In some sense of the way, it's hurting us; don't see where it's doing us much good, In fact, I know lots of people get help that don't need it and a heap of them that needs it ain't getting none. Take a big strapping Nigger man, he can draw forty cents a hour a fooling around on a government job doing nothing. That's how-come people can't get no labor hardly these days to make a crop on the farm. Yes'm this government work, it's giving the black -man more independence and making the white man more dependent every day that comes. Well, I just don't know what to take of the times nohow - just can't see into this 'lief work.
"My idea of voting's just like this, people vote to be a voting. Then again you mighty apt to have friends you want to vote for and while you voting, think mighty as well vote clean round. I used to vote pretty regular for a spell and then I'd hit up with bad luck and quit off for two or three years. It's like this, if a man votes, he'll have plenty friends, but he ain't counted much if he don't vote. I know I have as, much right to vote as another fellow and if I don't do it, I'm throwing away part of my rights. Then I vote because I think the man running is a good man for the place. But you can't tell for true if he'll be a good one or a bad one for the place 'cause when a man's running for office these days, he's everybody's friend. After all, it's just a chance of hiting on the right one, I reckon.
'We belong to the Baptist Church in Marion, but me and my wife don't go much now. Fig're we can live just as good staying home and behaving like we ought to on a Sunday, for things ain't like they was a time back. People used to go to church for the good they got out of it, but the church is more of a s'ciety now than anything else. A man joins the church these days and if you don't watch him, he's liable to do you dirty. People take the church for a kind of a blind nowadays - used to go to church to worship the Lord, but now the most of then goes for big looks. I've been noticing and watching around a heap and things sho' have changed up since I come along. When people got home from church in the old days, they'd eat dinner and set around and talk, but now they hurry home from church to get to some big-to-do. That's what ails the world now, I think. Ain't no rest nowhere. I used to drive my horse and buggy to town to church every Sunday and if a notion struck me to go these days, like old style, I'd travel that way again. But we've both just got out of the habit of going mostly 'cause old people can't get along like young folks, you know.
'I'll tell you, people just ain't healthy like they used to be and it's nothing but the rush they lives in and what they eats now that's causing it. Old people used home vittels altogether and they was heap healthier and lived longer than people of this day and time. And can't nobody stand this ripping and a tearing like most people goes these days. Like when tobacoo time comes, I don't get no rest. Yes'm, all the objections I have to tobacoo, it works you instead of you working it. Sometimes I have to work all night and all day in rushed tobacoo time. Then right after it's over, cotton picking's a staring you in the face. Life on the farm sho' keeps you stirring, but I don't reckon nothing else would suit me, being that was my raising.'
Another version of "Agnes Harrell," entitled "She's Just Done Well," can be found on pages 11230A-11240.
Approximately 3,616 Wörds
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
TITLE: AGNES HARRELL
Date of First Writing	February 24, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mrs. Agnes Harrell
Fictitious Name	____________________________________________________
Address	Marion, S. C.
Place	Marion County
Occupation	Housework
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Project #3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
February 24, 1939
AGNES HARRELL
(White)
MARION
SOUTH CAROLINA
Agnes Harrell, a mother of three sons, lives in a five-room rented apartment on the eastern edge of the town of Marion. Two of the boys, Charlie and Jasper, ages 19 and 15, live with their mother, while Louis, age 17, is married and lives in Sumter. Mrs. Harrell's husband deserted his family seventeen years ago and though he drops in to spend a night with them occasionally, his wife states that he has not provided a penny of support for his family since he left home. It has been only by hard work and the help of others that Agnes has been able to get the necessities of life for her little family throughout these years.
It was about two o'clock on this somewhat warm, but cloudy February afternoon, when a visit was made to the home of the Harrells. Agnes had just finished washing up her dinner dishes and was ready to begin on another job, for she always kept busy, but expressed a real willingness to stop and talk awhile.
Entering the front door, one passed directly into a large living room, simply but comfortably furnished and well-lighted by a flood of sunshine coming through two large windows. The room was sufficiently heated by a coal heater; fringed shades and coarse lace curtains hung at the windows; a gay-colored linoleum rug covered the greater part of the floor, and a number of tables and chairs were placed about the room, while in one corner stood a mahogany-colored whatnot of six three- cornered shelves. The shelves were put together with six spools at each corner, which Agnes explained were given to her at the W.P.A. Sewing Room. Out of these few empty spools and some rough boards, this useful article of furniture had been made at the cost of only a dollar. On the walls hung several calendars and a framed copy of the Lord's Prayer. A wooden-framed clock ticked lightly on the mantel and on each side of it, paper flowers of various bright colors presented gay decorations. Agnes, who often does house cleaning for other people to earn their daily bread, had spent some of her energy on her own rooms, too, for everything looked spotless and in perfect order.
A short woman, only five feet in height and weighing over two hundred pounds, Agnes offers a pleasing countenance to all who meet her. Her well-rounded face, big bright eyes, mass of pretty black hair, and complexion glowing with health, little show the hardships she has undergone in the last seventeen years. She expresses a deep gratitude for every blessing that has come to her and is indeed proud of her hair. On one occasion, when complimented on the beauty of her hair, she remarked: "Yes, my hair is pretty. You know, the Bible says a woman's hair is her glory, and there's a lot of truth in them words too, if you know'd it."
Dressed in a black silk skirt, a blue and white cheeked cotton jacket, and a big print apron, Agnes insisted that her visitor take the large rocker near the heater. Then she began to poke the fire a little and sweep up some falling ashes beneath the stove as she continued to talk: "Had to go to work this morning and ain't got things cleaned up like I generally keeps them looking. But that's all right - reckon you've seen things tore up before."
When Agnes learned that the purpose of one's visit was to ask her to relate a true story of her own life, she did not hesitate to quickly reply: "No'm, I don't mind telling you whatever you might want to know 'bout me. And I don't see no sense in putting no other name different from mine to what you write 'bout me neither. I've lived a life I don't mind nobody knowing and I hope when I ain't able to keep going, there'll be some way provided. Yes'm, I've made a honest living for me and my children seventeen years and I ain't got nothing I care 'bout keeping under no cover. People need'nt come up and say they had to do this and that sharp trick to get along 'cause if they live a decent life, there'll always be a way provided.
"I've got three children - all them's boys. I've sho' had a tough time raising my younguns, too, but I thank the Lord for sparing me to get them up big enough to help themselves. I've had lots of trouble and hard times to get along, but by the help of the good Lord and other people. I've pulled through to the present and I'm thankful. Yes, I'm thankful to our Father and President Roosevelt for what they've done for me and my children.
"Long as my father and mother lived, I never did know what it was to want for anything. I was born and raised in No. 6 Township, Georgetown County, on my father's farm along with twelve other head of children. No. 6 Township, that's thirty- two miles from Georgetown, twixt there and Hemingway. I always was a poor girl, but we never know'd what it was to want for any-thing. My father owned a two-horse farm and we made enough of provisions on the farm to last from one year till the next. One year, we made thirteen banks of eating potatoes and two big barns of corn outside of our cotton. Then in the summer we made enough market stuff to buy all our little extras. Yes, if I had today what I used to have, I wouldn't have to worry over life. NO, when I was a child and wanted a thing, it wasn't to worry over for we done had it - all we had to do was to go out and get it. But I'll tell you, when you lose your mother and father, seems like everything you've got's gone.
"I went to a little school called Carver's Bay first and then the name changed to Dunnegan school. Yes'm, when I left that country, the school was still passing through the name of Dunnegan. But going to school in my young days sho' wasn't near like it is now. I never went to school no higher than the fourth grade and then I hadn't done much. I remember, we had to leave home at seven-thirty o'clock in the morning to get to school on time and walk every bit of one and one-half miles. School lasted from nine o'clock to four o'clock and that'd put me to get home 'bout five o'clock in the evening. Soon as we got home, we had to go to work on the farm. Finally it just got to the place where I had to quit school to help my father make a crop. You see, there wasn't but one time to make a crop just like I learned afterwards there wasn't but one right time to go to school. Children's wonderfully blessed to go to school this day and time. I'll tell you.
"I reckon I was 'boat fourteen years old when I quit school and got married at nineteen. My husband was a farmer and we stayed on his father's farm six years and made a good living. But that last year we stuck together, everything fell through on the farm. My husband said, 'Love, I believe I'll go and work in the cotton mill next year and then we'll have something to get another start with.' I begged him not to go for I know'd cotton mills was fast places and he'd drift away, but he would go in spite of all I could say. And I was right, he never come back to live with me and the younguns no more. I felt it; know'd it was coming. That's what wrecks so many homes and how-come I hated so bad for him to leave me. It nearly run me crazy 'cause he'd been good to me as could be 'fore he left home. He just got out and kept a-drifting; never did have no fusses in all our married life. Seems like I could over burying my first child, what died with the stomach colitis and yellow t'rash, better than I could him leaving me.
"He comes back home off and on to spend a night, but he ain't been no service to us in seventeen years. Some people's ashamed to tell sech stuff as that, but I ain't. The good Lord knows it and I don't care if the world does. A woman can't help her husband walking off and leaving her, but she can live a respectable life. When he left me with them younguns and went to work in the cotton mill, he was making eighteen and nineteen dollars a week. He know'd my little children were suffering, but he wouldn't give us a penny. Yes'm, my oldest boy was a-crying for bread and I don't know what we would've done, but the good Lord opened end provided a way. And since I've been in Marion, I've worked by the hardest and shed many a tear, but trusting in the good Lord, I've always got along. My husband was to my house here in Marion Last October, but he still don't give us near a cent - always acts like he's down and out when he comes to see us.
"I stayed on where I was for five years after my husband left me and worked for what I got. Worked on the farm in the summer and took in washing in the winter to keep us going. I decided while I had my three children in a hut, I better keep them there 'cause I know'd it's hardly ever two families can get along. Yes'm, I've kept house to myself ever since I was married.
"I was getting along so poorly A-working so hard down in Georgetown County, I moved to McCall and worked in the cotton mill for twelve months. No'm, my husband was working in a mill to Rookingham, North Carolina at that time. I was making four dollars a week there a-working on the winders and at them rates, I could buy all we wanted to eat and pay house rent out of it, too, but I sho' can't do it now. I worked on that job till the mill shut down and left me to get along best I could them last four months I stayed to McCall. Why I picked cotton along and along for a living and the good people give me something to eat.
"It wasn't long from then till Janie Johnson, a woman I know'd in McCall, moved up here to Marion and persuaded me to tear up and come to Marion, too. She said she had a job for me to start on time I got here, but I found myself dropped down in a bunch of strangers and not a piece of job to bring me as in a bite of bread. Had to go in the cotton patch down to Mr. Leitners and pick cotton to pay my house rent the first year I come here to live. Then my little baby was having chill and fever and I never know'd which way to turn.
"Yes'm, I moved here in 1929 and rented a house over on Montgomery Street for six dollars a month, well, it ain't no use to round a stump to tell the truth - might as well come up and face the fore. I've raked lawns and cleaned house for people many a day to get something to eat. Mrs. Lide, she's the best friend I ever know'd. She's all the time a-going 'bout this town and helping some poor creature get along. She learned 'bout the trouble I was in and she went to people all over this town and said, 'Agnes is here on us with those three children to take care of and if she can get anything to do, she'll do it. Now, people, I want all of you to give her a job.' Yes'm, Mrs. Lide taken that much interest in me and I'm thankful to her for it.
"Well, I went to work doing house cleaning for a dollar a day and I don't say it 'cause it's me, but ain't nobody never complained 'bout my work yet. Cose getting a day's work onced in awhile wasn't enough to feed and clothe me and three younguns and pay house rent, too, but everybody was mighty good to help us along. Why these people at the schoolhouse give me enough of what the school children carried there at Thanksgiving for poor people to last me till Christmas. Then they give me another load at Christmas to carry me over another month. And Judge and Mrs. Lide, they've sho' been good to me. Don't seem like just a friend - seem more like a mother and a father. Yes'm, that's the way I feels 'bout Judge and Mrs. Lide, 'cause when you lose you mother and father, seems like the sun don't shine nowhere. Then there's Miss Eunice Lambert, she's got out many a day and got me something to eat. Don't know where she got it from, but she'd come stepping in with it herself.
"From then on, I kept on a-catching what work I could, 'cause I've got the will to do and don't mind putting my hand to any work that's got a honest living in it. It's many a day that I've worked for the county cleaning up the City Hall and Health Department. But I've done so much hard work in my life, I can't work like I used to. Bringing children into this world, tending them, a-laboring to make a living, and doing all the housework, that's more than half, if you know'd it.
"I kept on a-doing a day's work round and 'bout till this government relief work come up. I didn't join it right off, but Mrs. Lide's sister got to be head over the sewing room and she sent word for me to sign up on the government work. Mrs. Lide explained to her that I was embarrassed to do sech as that, but she said I might as well get it as the others that was getting it. You know, it wasn't a bit of trouble for me to get on. They started me off making quilts in 1934 and then I worked myself up till I got to be a pretty good seamstress. They raised and out us so much on that sewing room job till it's hard to tell how much I was getting, but our average wages was twenty-air dollars a month mostly. Then the government give us some commodities along with the pay sech as plain flour, pack of butter, and some prunes. Best thing they give us was this here smoke meat - that was just fine. Cose it was all a help, you can feel that.
"I started working for the government in 1934 and in 1936, I thought to be sure they'd cut me off. My boy, Charlie, want off to the C.C.C. Camp at King's Mountain. But 'bout the time they made up to take me off the sewing room, Charlie quit and come home just didn't like it. You know, while that boy was in the C.C.C. Camp, I never got a dollar of his money. He'd spend his part soon as he got it and time the other part come home to me, he'd be here to grab it. No'm, he never stayed in the C.C.C. Camp but four months. Woman, I'll tell you, I've worked for myself.
"I worked on for the government till 'bout a year and six months ago. Charlie got a job at the veneer plant and just 'cause he was making a $1.90 a day, they took my job away from me. Charlie lost his job at the veneer plant last July and we've sho' had it tough getting along since then. No, I never tried to get back on the government work. I ain't spent no thought over it only I knows some people's working for the government that don't needs it like I does. There's plenty women foreman have husbands a-working and just 'cause my little boy had a job, they out me off. It's a dishonest proposition, I'll tell you, the way they work so unfair with it. But I don't reckon I ought to talk sech 'bout it. They considered I didn't need it and if it ain't helping me now, it's helping some other poor somebody and I'm thankful for them. Anyhow it don't matter with me - anything that's got a honest living in it. I'll go right at it. Still, when this government work plays out, a heap of people go feel what a pinch is. I know'd where it helped me and felt the need of it, but don't care how good a job some people have, they don't appreciate it. They'd feel just like my boy, if they was out off now - wouldn't have no job and couldn't get none. Can't hardly buy a job these days.
"Little as people knows it, I've sho' been up against a tough proposition since I got dropped from the W.P.A. I work a day and a half a week now cleaning up the Methodist Church and the City Hall and don't draw but three dollars a week for all both jobs. Yes'm, that's all the work I can find anywhere to do. Cose it'd take me a longer time to clean up that big Methodist Church, but my oldest boy ain't got nothing to do and he helps me along on my job. That's Charlie - he come home sick the fifth of January and his doctor's bills have coat me two dollars a week ever since. The doctor said he had some kind of blood disease - had awful chills and fever to start with. He's up now, thank the good Lord, but he's still mighty poorly. Now, ain't I getting a heap out of my work? No'm, ain't nobody knows my troubles but the Lord.
"The rent got so high where I was living over on Waverly Way Street and me not making anything to speak of, I know'd I had to figure out another place to stay. Mr. Tindall offered me these five rooms for five dollars a month and I thought that was reasonable enough. Cose I furnishes my part and pays for my lights and water. Mr. Tindall's wife died awhile back and him and his boy live in that other part of the house. Yes'm, they keeps to their side and I keeps to mine.
"If I had it all to do myself, I couldn't do it, but my baby boy helps me a little. If Jasper wasn't working, he couldn't go to school for he wouldn't have nothing to wear. That's how-come Louis and Charlie had to quit going to school. I wasn't making it to send them and they couldn't get nothing to do. 'Twas all I could do to get something to eat and a place to stay, so my two oldest boys had to quit school in the sixth ' grade. Louis went to night school last year, but he's married now and that ends his learning, I reckon.
"Yes, my baby goes to school in the morning and works at Rogers' grocery store in the evening. He comes home from school and swallows his dinner in a hurry, so as to get to the store by three o'clock. Then he knocks off work at six o'clock and goes to Mrs. Lides every night at that time to get his lessons. Mrs. Lide, she sees to it that Jasper learns his lessons every night for the next day. He gets done studying 'bout eight-thirty o'clock and then he goes back to the store and helps them straighten up things for the next day. He don't never come home no sooner than eleven o'clock of a night. He's in the eighth grade now and I think he's done mighty well minding he had to take it rough and tumble.
'When Jasper settles up of a week to the store, he brings home two dollars and onced and again three dollars in a busy week. He uses it mostly to get his school supplies and school lunch, 'cause I ain't got it to give him to buy them with. Then if I runs short a week, he takes it up. Yes'm, if I was to die tonight and they called for a penny to close my eyes, I wouldn't have it.
"I ain't never moved my church membership to Marion myself, but my three boys belong to that big Methodist Church up there on Godbold Street. Still we go to the Church of God over yonder on Spring Street mostly. That's a Holiness Church and Sunday night's the big time over there, but they have prayer meeting every Wednesday evening. The regular pastor lives on Waverly Way Street and the other preacher is one of these evangelist and he lives in a little trailer house right behind the church. Well, they do, they do have big crowds over there. Bet they entertains one hundred and fifty head of people on a Sunday night. Gracious Lord, the Church of God is as different from the Methodist Church as night is from day. You just ought to go and see for yourself - couldn't hardly explain the difference to save my life. I'll tell you, don't see no dancing and shouting at the Methodist Church like goes on at the Church of God. Don't allow no woman to bob her hair, wear no kind of jewelry, gold tooth, short sleeves, anklet socks, nor dip snuff. And they's strictly against a man rolling his socks. Forbids a man to belong to a secret order, smoke, chew, nor drink liquor. Can't nobody go to no shows, dances, nor play cards. Why they calls their dancing the holy dance. That's the rules of the Church of God and them what joins that church, they've got to abide by it's rules. No, sir. I'll tell anybody I ain't joined no Church of God, 'cause I've sho' got to have my short sleeves and low neck dresses a-working like I do. Just go there to look and listen like most of them other folks, I reckon.
"I could vote, but I don't. I just don't feel like it's right for lady folks to vote, 'cause I wasn't raised that way. Cose we's here and if we don't vote, other people will run it over us and get everything a-going their way. But I ain't never voted but twice in my life. I voted in Georgetown the first time and then I voted for Mr. Lide when he was running for senator. Mr. and Mrs. Lide had been so sweet to me, I felt like I could do that little job for them. Cose Mrs. Lide, she come and carried me up there and showed me how I was to do.
"Thank the good Lord, I've been blessed with strong health all my days, else I never could've carried my burden. Weighed two hundred and fifty pounds the last time I stood on the scales Yes'm, when I begin to fleshen up, I wanted to take something to reduce, but Mrs. Lide wouldn't agree to it. She said I might injure my health and get so I couldn't work for my living. Mrs. Lide used to tell me I was the funniest thing 'bout my eating, but I can't work on none of these queer diets of salads, ices, and a stingy sandwich. I've got to have my good old standby home cooking, sech as, rice, hominy, corn bread, some sort of greens, and boiled meat. You see, I works 'bout all the time and I've got to eat a heavy ration to keep a-going.
"Days I'm at home, there's three meals a day to cook, and when I do that, the housework, and the washing, there's no time to recreate. Even sit up here at night and make quilt squares. I know I've got the will power 'bout me all right - know I've got a share to do long as I live. I believe, when a woman lives seventeen years and keeps enough to eat tor herself and three, growing children, does all the housework, keeps the beds repaired, and something for the youngsters to wear, she just done well."
Approximately 1,871 Words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE; THE BACK-DATE BUGGY
Date of First writing	March 23, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. Berkeley Grice
Fictitious Name	Berkeley Lawrimore
Address	Marion, S.C. (Rural)
Place	Marion County
Occupation	Farming
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Davis
Project #3613
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, B.C.
March 23, 1939
THE BACK-DATE BUGGY
MARION COUNTY
SOUTH CAROLINA
Berkeley Lawrimore and his wife live alone in a small trame house, overlooking Dusty Hills Golf Course, three miles east of Marion. They are both farmers, one might say, for they share together the work that must be done to make a living on their ten acres of farming land.
As the little dwelling of the Lawrimores was approached on this windy March afternoon, the entire surroundings were filled with intense quiet. Only the wind seemed to stir the stillness as it swept over the fields, rustled in the trees, and kept the limber-necked jonquilles, scattered about the front yard, bobbing back and forth with it's breeze.
But on intruding to the back of the house, the quiet was broken by the clucking of hens walking lazily about the premises, the mooing of a cow in it's stall nearby, and the shrill echo of a bobwhite from the distant woods beyond. Advancing yet a little nearer to a large barn, standing about fifty yards behind the house, a mumbling of voices seemed to come from some hidden spot within. Just at that moment, Berkeley Lawrimore stepped out from beneath the shed of the barn pulling an old time buggy with him. He was followed by his wife, Nettie, pushing the buggy from behind as it rolled into the open, standing off from their decrepit old vehicle, the Lawrimores looked up in astonishment to find that they were not alone.
Berkeley Lawrimore, a man of average size, with a farmer's brown skin, light blue eyes, sandy mustache and hair of shaggy lengths, was dressed in a dingy blue work shirt, blue overalls, and a tattered black felt hat. His wife, a small woman with brown hair and eyes, a little round face, and sunburned complexion, offered a less careless appearance. She wore a spotted print dress, homespun apron, tiny black felt hat, and brown sweater.
"Our old buggy's got to looking so shabby, we're fixing to scrape all that hard mud off that's stuck on it and paint it over new for Easter," explained Nettie Lawrimore. "we want to try and get it done while the weather's favorable, but if you don't mind to sit out here to the lot, Berkeley can talk to you while he's scraping them spokes to that wheel. He loves to talk so good, he don't never turn down no chance he gets." Nettie Lawrimore goes to the house and comes back dragging a home-made straight chair with a cowhide bottom. "This chair's not none the best, but it's better than getting your coat all mussed up on that straw over there."
"Yes, we've got a pretty nice little farm here, but being uneducated, I wouldn't hardly know how to impart to you what part of the business I ought to speak of," began Berkeley Lawrimore. "Now, tush! tush! I've done spoke a error to you first thing. I don't own a foot of land to my name. My wife bought these ten acres of land and built that four-room house yonder with a part of the fourteen hundred dollars that come to her on the death of her father. She give fifty-eight dollars a acre for this land and paid six hundred dollars for the house. It's good land and there's not but one objection I've got to it - it's headquarters for the mischief down here with that swimming pool and golf course cross yonder. You know, Where there's one eternal whirl by a house, it's bothering to a old man sixty-nine years old.
"Take a poor fellow like me. I've been handicapped ever since I've been big enough to know the right and wrong of a thing. My father owned 1600 acres of farming land and if he hadn't been so soft-hearted, I might've been a wealthy man today. But to favor a friend, pa endorsed a note for him worth $16,000 and soon after his death, his property was sold to settle that man's debt. Yes, I've got papers in my trunk right yonder in the house now to prove then words - can show them to you in a pair of minutes. And since then I've seen that man's daughter a-driving around town in a big limousine and me a-walking the streets a pauper. Now, they tell me, she's keeping a little boarding house to make a living.
"When my father died, I was just a lad twelve years old and how-come I never did get no higher than the fourth grade. I always wanted to expound the scriptures, but being uneducated, I couldn't do it. My boyhood days were spent in absolute slavery for I had to work by the hardest to help my brother take care of my mother and sister. My brother thought he could pay the debt off the farm, but poor boy, he fell dead behind the plough - lightning struck him one evening just about laying off time. I was sixteen years old then and the farm was sold from under us before the year was out. We moved to town and as long as my mother lived and my sister stayed single, I eked out a living for them working about on clerking jobs as best I could for twenty dollars a month. Yes, I sacrificed the prime of my manhood for my widowed mother and baby sister.
"The year after my mother died, I married my old girl over there and wouldn't take a million dollars for her today. You see, when we got married, I was without money, without learning, deep in debt, and out of doors, but we've made a pretty good go of life together. We started out a-sharefarming on a little place down next Tabernacle and kept on a-moving in that line for the next twenty-five years. We always had a mind to try our luck on a new spot of land and never did stay but a couple of years to a place. That's the sharecropper's style, you know. Considering a man ain't got a scattering of dirt to his name, sharefarming's a blessing, but there ain't no more'n a bare living in it for a honest man like me.
"We don't make no big-to-do of farming here on Nettie's little spot of land, but it's good enough for a humble old couple like me and Nettie. Yes'm, lt's just a one-horse farm. See our old gray mare a-peeping through them cracks yonder? She's all the help we have except for the hiring of a few Niggers in cotton picking time. But there's not one foot of land in all these ten acres that's wasted, we plant three acres of cotton - that's the limit on my government card - five acres of corn, one-half acre of peat for reseeding and hay purposes, one-half acre in a garden, and the other half acre is under our house and yard yonder, chicken yard, and this here feed barn. But we can plant cabbage between cotton and irish potatoes grows between corn.
"We buy our fertilizer from the Marion Oil Mill do our own mixing. Put six hundred pounds to the acre of such grade of fertilizer as acid, nitrate of potash, soda and cotton seed meal, we've got a guano distributor, that hay rake over there, and a few turnplows, but that's about the limit of our farming equipment.
"Last year, we made two bales of cotton that sold for $38.70 a bale, twenty bushels of corn to the acre, twelve bushels of peas, and ten bushels of potatoes - just enough for our own use. And being such back-date folks, we's still a-pulling fodder. The cultivation of tobacco employs most farmers so greatly today that they find it cheaper to plant pea vines that take the place of fodder."
"Pulling fodder's hot work in the summer time," interrupted Nettie.
"Then my wife, she makes a kind of living selling such as: eggs, chickens, butter, vegetables, strawberries, blackberries, and huckleberries to the curb market in town. She ain't been making but eight dollars a month lately, just having a few eggs to sell, but she has sold as high as twenty dollars a month. Reckon we've got seventy to eighty head of chickens. Now, would you like to know what breed we carry? Well, I calls them a Duke's mixture - Rhode Island Reds, Barred Rocks, and Country Game, we have two cows, too, and Nettie makes a right smart on butter and buttermilk, but there's a law against country folks selling sweet milk in town. They claim that's done to protect the dairies, but we's the ones that's needing the protecting. If you could see me and Nettie going to town soon of a morning with our old gray horse and broke down buggy, you'd likely wonder where them poor back-date folks come from.
"Now, is there anything in the bird line that interest you! I've got a nice line of birds over there - the purple martins. We generally have forty to sixty purple martins and that's what I've got thirty-two gourds erected up on them two high poles for. You see, I have every other gourd turned backwards and forwards. That's to keep them from getting in a tangle with one another. They come from Brazil and make their appearance here the first of every March. Then they leave this portion of the country about the last of September. If they don't find them gourds up there when they come back in the spring, they'll run all around here just a-talking in their bird-like way till I put them up. They're a guard against the hawk and the blue dauber - best known in the south as the barn robber.
"Hold on a minute! I've runned over so much nonsense in my unlearned way of talking, I forgot to tell you about my boy, Charlie. He's a-working in Washington - got his education at the University of South Carolina in Columbia. Now, I'll have to tell you how he come of it. He was so bent on getting a learning, Nettie give him a start off with a portion of the fourteen hundred dollars her pa left her. Then a rich lady in Columbia loaned him enough money to go the balance of the tine. He met her through some friends and she just taken a fancy to him. He explained to her how he wanted to finish school and she didn't deny him. She told him, 'You've got a honest face on you.' She just taken chances on him, a stranger. That's why he ought to appreciate it all the more and he does to the highest. Yes, he carried her a seven dollar and a half wreath of flowers the last time he come home from Washington. He's been a-working in Washington three years and he's done paid that lady off, bought a three hundred acre farm to Tabernacle, and my wife holds a five thousand dollar life insurance policy he's a-carrying. Now, you see who holds the purse strings. Charlie told me what he's doing up there in Washington the last time he come home, but being uneducated, I wouldn't dare to try to explain it to you - just know he's a chemist.
"But let me tell you one more thing that's brought joy to my heart. Dr. Joe Evans, one of my old boyhood friends, come to see me the other day. He's visited every country around the world and come back to see a little numskull like me that don't know enough to go in when it rains. Now, how could such a clodhopper as me interest a man that's got the world's experience? It's 'cause I'm plain and Joe Evans is plain. That's how-come he don't mind coming back to see me a poor fellow a-living in a little humble but and hugging my neck. Yes, you can tell what a back-date we is a-riding in a vehicle drawn by a horse and known as a buggy."
Project # 1655
Annie Ruth Davis
Marion, S.C.
December 27, 1938
Wilbur White
Marion, S.C.
(White)
"I bought this farm I'm living on now way back yonder in 1919. My, my, that seems like a long time ago. Time sure does fly. It's a dandy location though being only three and one-half miles from the town of Marion and right on Highway No. 501. The South was practically bankrupt at that time, and cotton wasn't bringing no more than five cents a pound. But when it comes to speaking of living on the farm, I'm a sticker. That's the life for me, I'll tell anybody.
"I just took a turn to follow up farming naturally, I reckon, for all my people were farmers as far back as we have record of them. The first settlement known of the White family in Marion County was made over here to Shiloh in the section of Wahee about 1800. I suppose that's how that long bridge over there next Pee Dee, called White's Crossing, gets it's name. Oh, that country was chock full of Whites at that time. Both my parents come from over in that section and my mother was a White same as my father. Yes, I tell folks I'm white all the way around.
"My grandparents owned acres and acres of land in their lifetime along with a bunch of slaves, but after the Civil War, they were stripped of all their Niggers and lost about all their land too. I really could not say exactly what my grandparents were worth before the Civil War, but I know they had nothing to speak of after it was over. I'm told they had a right good little number of Niggers in those days, but I cannot say how many. There's quite a bunch of Niggers by the name of White scattered all over Wahee and Centenary sections of Marion County today who are more than likely descendants of slaves once owned by the White family.
"Soon after the war was over, my grandparents died and my mother and father were left with very little - only a few acres of poor land which was lost in the struggle to keep on. In the 1880's, torn up and discouraged by the loss of his property and weary with some of his family always sick from living in the mossy malaria section of Wahee, my father moved to Centenary as a tenant farmer. But times were tight along that time and a tenant farmer had to scratch for a living, while the landowner sat back and raked in the wealth stored up by the hard labor of the tenant. As the years rolled by, my father moved from one farm to another, hoping each time that he might have the luck to strike a better place. Some years he cash-rented a house and small piece of land and other times he worked as a sharecropper. He preferred to rent for cash always as more freedom and independence was to be gained from this method.
"Finally, my father bought a few acres of land on the Carmichael place near Centenary, where I was born in a log house in 1892-93. But he happened to hit on such a poor piece of farming land that he was never able to pay for it and after four or five years, he had to go back to tenant life, moving from place to place as time went on.
"Times were mighty tight with us along those days and if it hadn't been for Mr. Blackwell in Marion, I don't know how my father would have managed. When he needed anything, he would make a trip to town and go there to Mr. Blackwell's wholesale store and trade two or three hundred dollars worth of stuff a year there in fertilizer, cloth, sugar and the like. Then at the end of the year, after he had collected from his crop, he would come to town and pay up his account. It usually took about everything thing he had made for the year, but it looked like there was no other way around it. My father used to say he had always lived a year behind the times and he expected it would follow him to his grave. And he continued to shift from place to place as a tenant farmer as long as he lived.
"In my childhood days, I went to Palmer School near Centenary and managed to pick up a right good little scattering of learning there. There were a hundred pupils enrolled in the school at that time, though there were no standards at all to speak of in those days. It was one of these old time two-teacher schools with no grades, no reports, and no promotions. One of the best teachers I ever had, I remember, was wild as a turkey; but I know that I learned more from that man than I ever expect any of my three children to learn from these educated teachers today. In my high school days, I went to the old Centenary school, which was graded and reports sent out quarterly to our parents.
"Oh, my children don't have any idea about the kind, of school I used to go to. No, no, when I was a kid, I didn't think a thing of walking three miles to school every day, rain or shine, hot or cold. With my dinner in a tin pail and my three books thrown in my little home-made sack, I would leave home every morning by daylight and I never recall getting home in the late afternoon that I couldn't see our old kerosene lamp burning through the window from a good distance down the road. Now, my children catch the bus right at our own door about eight o'clock on a morning and ride the three miles to town in no time. Then they get out of school at two o'clock and are back home every day no later than two-thirty.
"We children used to have no end of fun playing there to Palmer School and Centenary. Used to play baseball, shinney, steal chips, fox and dog, and Indian and American. One day, we boys took the girls by the hair and pulled them all over the school grounds. Oh, they fought and reared and pitched, but we took them by force and carried them off through the woods. You see, we were playing Indian and American.
"We used to have to walk the foot logs cross Reedy Creek, too, and that was a pretty dangerous business though we children didn't know it then. Those foot logs were about a quarter of a mile long and the water was at least two feet deep under them all the way. One time I was going cross them one freezing day in January and when I got about middle way, I heard a man coming along behind me trying to make an old ox wade the water clear cross. The ox wouldn't budge and the man was standing on the foot logs just a beating on the ox and yelling at him. It was such a sight to see them, I started walking backwards cross the logs and not looking which way I was going till it wasn't long before I fell off in the water. I had to run two miles home in those wet clothes and every rag I had on was about frozen stiff by the time I got there. An experience like that would give any of these town children pneumonia today, but nothing didn't hurt us then.
"Twenty or thirty of us boys were going to school another time one morning and we decided it wasn't right for the Niggers to walk the same foot logs as us. We all got together and said we were not going to stand for it another day and something had to be done about it. We declared we would fix them that day. Then we picked up all the sticks and old pieces of wood we could find around the woods there and lined up on the foot logs to wait for the Niggers to come along going to their school. It wasn't long before here come the Niggers and we told them that those foot logs belonged to the white people and if they wanted to get on the other side of the creek, they would have to wade the water. They said they wouldn't do it and commenced pulling up lightwood stumps to throw at us and anything they could get hold of. Oh, we had war there for a spell, but we made them Niggers wade that water before the fight ended. My, my, we had a big time with them darkies. Spencer Legette, he was in the bunch and he was such a whale of a talker, I think he just outtalked them. By the way, old Spencer is a major in the United States Army today. He is a graduate of the Citadel and later taught mathematics at West Point.
"I remember, one day a bunch of gypsies come along the road about time for school to turn out and when we children saw those long caravans of covered wagons, it nearly scared us to death. People used to tell us gypsies would steal any little children they saw and we believed every word of it. Gypsies traveled in scattered groups of a dozen or more with a long space between them, but we children didn't know about that then. Me and Max Rowell - just little bit of fellows at that time - jumped in the road after the first ones went by and started home. Soon we looked back and here come another dozen of them wagons. We scooted out in the woods and lay down in some gallberries till that bunch got by. Then soon as we got good and started again, here come another string of wagons. Then another and another. Me and Max knew, if we stayed on the road, there wasn't no way keeping them gypsies from stealing us so we cut cross the swamp and made for home. Went about two miles out the way, but we felt some proud to get home safe that day.
"When I was coming up, I used to walk to church often and sometimes my mother and father would let me stand on the back of their buggy and ride to church with them. I went to Terrace Bay Baptist Church part the time and to Centenary Methodist church at other times. My father was a Baptist and my mother was a Methodist. Neither one of them were inclined to be very strong to any one certain denomination, and I reckon that's how- come I've never stuck to any particular church. Me and all my family attend the Baptist Church today and that suits me good as any, I suppose. Yes, when I was a child, I used to go to the Methodist Sunday School in the morning and to the Baptist Sunday School in the afternoon of the same day. I believe I picked up a lots more going to Sunday School in my early days than children learn these days. Mr. Brown used to teach we boys there to Centenary Methodist Church and my, my, he could make a lecture. He would not only talk about the Sunday school lesson for that day, but also discussed any problems confronting the people at that time. In fact, I have never heard any man more instructive. But he was a sharp old fellow in more ways than one. We children used to have a habit of dropping a penny in the collection plate every Sunday and he told us one Sunday that there wasn't any sense in wasting money like that for the church didn't need it. I've never heard anybody give advice like that to children before or since. But that was a penny-wise old fellow, I'll tell you.
"All through my early days, we used to have these big Sunday school picnics on the river every year and that was one big day for all of us. Everybody would carry the nicest kind of baskets crammed full of good old country home cooking and we would cook what fish we caught right there on the banks of the river. Oh, we would have the biggest kind of time. We would always go in swimming in the morning and after dinner all the crowd would gather around old Captain Matt Stanley and listen to the stories he had to tell of his experiences in life. He was a veteran of the Mexican War as well as of the Confederate War. Oh, he was a great storyteller and would tell all kind of stories of what he had seen. He didn't have one bit of religion about him, but he would tell Bible stories without end. The old man was always fond of his liquor and wherever he went, he would carry it along and take a small drink before eating. But mind you, he wouldn't never offer nobody else none. Said it made his food go down lighter. But he was a wonderful old man and I really think I received a good bit of education just from listening to the old gentleman's stories. He lived to be ninety years old and when he died, that was a great loss to the Centenary community.
"After I finished high school, I hung around the farm until 1912 and managed somehow to save enough to go to a business school in Columbia. At the end of that year, I got a job as a bookkeeper for a man over to Bishopville, but I didn't like the work and went back to the farm in four months time. That was in 1913, and though the outlook for a farmer seemed dull, cotton being down to five cents a pound, I figured I could make a better living on the farm than I had been making cooped up like a chicken in a little town office.
"I didn't get settled good there home before the World War started and as time went on, things picked up on the farm considerably. Tobacco prices began to rise and in 1917, times were booming with cotton selling for forty cents a pound and tobacco bringing thirty-seven cents a pound. In 1918, I cleared $472.00 to every acre I planted, cotton bringing $200.00 a bale. Yes, everything picked up very materially for the farmers at that time. In fact, I consider that about the most prosperous period I have ever known. In 1918, I went in the Army, but did not go to France. In 1919, when I got back home, crops still sold high and I bought my farm for $11,000, covering a hundred acres. However, I could not pay for it all one time. The depression came on in 1920 and cotton dropped from forty to twenty cents a pound, tobacco from thirty to fifteen cents. The year 1921 proved to be worse times at which time both my mother and my father died. In 1923, prices began to pick up and I got married. In 1931-32, the boll weevil hit the farmers pretty heavy, but it really never has been a serious menace to any of us farmers. Then things picked up in 1933 and in 1935. I finished paying for my farm. In 1936, I was able to buy a hundred acres more of land which makes me own two hundred acres at the present time.
"In 1923, I bought my first automobile, a Ford Model-T, 2 bought a Chevrolet Coach in 1928, a Ford V-8 in 1934, and a Dodge Sedan in 1936, which car I drive now. I have three tenant houses on my farm, a large feed barn, stables, two tobacco barns and live in a seven-room house. In 1937, I added electric lights to my house to take the place of kerosene lamps and in 1938, I spent over $1,700.00 on furniture and repair work on the farm. Oh, I tell you, it takes money to live these days.
"I make all the corn, potatoes, and vegetables I need to run my farm and always have a surplus to sell. Also, I make a considerable profit on my hogs and raise more chickens than we can use. During my childhood days, my father usually made from $200.00 to $400.00 money crop a year, and the most he ever made was $600.00 in 1910. In 1937, my money crop amounted to $7,000, but not above expenses. In 1920, I made only 300 pounds of tobacco to the acre, while I made 1100 pounds last year; made 30 bushels of corn to the acre in 1920 against 45 bushels to the acre in 1937. It takes about four or five hundred bushels of corn a year to run my farm and I sell two to four hundred bushels a year also. Along with that, I use one to two hundred bales of hay a year to feed my stock on. Yes, there has been a tremendous crop increase since 1920, which is due to the use of more and better fertilizers on the farm. Although there is not as much land under cultivation today as there was during the Civil War, the average farmer makes a great deal more to the acre than he did then. My father considered a half a bale of cotton to the acre a fine crop now if a farmer doesn't get a bale to the acre, it's a flop. Just like my father thought a two-year old hog the ideal hog to kill, and now a six to eight months one is about right.
"But even with all the strides in the last few years, living on the farm can't come up to what it used to be. Christmas times, people used to take a week off and now they hardly have time for one day. I remember how people used to have neighborhood parties around to one another's house and everybody that went had a good time. All of us stayed in the house, too, but I hear people complaining that, when there's a party these days, they can't get none of these young folks to stay nowhere near the house. When I was coming up, people didn't know what a card was. Oh, we would have fine times at our parties playing all sorts of games that the whole crowd could join in and have a little fruit for refreshments before breaking up for the evening.
"Another thing, when I was a boy, I was great to hunt and fish and I know I haven't tried my luck at either in fifteen years. Used to hunt and fish all night long. When I was about seventeen years old, I caught twenty fish with a hook and line in no time one night and killed twenty squirrels one time in twenty-one shots. I remember, I waded clear cross Reedy Creek one day and killed a wild turkey that weighed seventeen pounds. Yes, I used to go hunting twice a week and now I don't go none. Oh, we did enjoy those nights on the river bank. Wouldn't carry a thing with us but what clothes we had on, a frying pan, fishing pole, and, after we had caught all the fish we wanted, we would make up a big fire to cook the fish and tell stories around. I did love to lie there and listen to the owls hoot and hear the river water running in the bushes. Occasionally it would come a rainy night and then we would, be in a peck of trouble. Those rainy nights were about as miserable as any I ever spent. But it's not much fun to ever hunt and fish now, since nearly all the land and lakes are posted these days, while the few places left open to anybody are kept cleaned up all the time. That's the way of the world today, I reckon; but when I was young, nobody ever thought of posting their land.
"Seems like sickness wasn't such a bear in my boyhood days either, and people were lots more healthy than they are these days. It would take two or three hours to half a day to get a doctor in the country years ago. Usually the patient was better or dead one, before the doctor got there, we had these old country quack doctors then who didn't know to give anything but calomel, soda and quinine, rhubarb, and asafetida - that was the limit. But one good thing, doctors didn't cost much then. The old time doctor would come to see a family all year and not charge more than $30.00 for his services. And I hardly think he knew what a prescription was like for he always carried his medicine with him and never had the occasion to write any. On the other hand, if he happened to be around anybody's house near mealtime, he would stop and eat with the family free of charge. Preachers used to do that too.
"Well, it seems to me the old way of living was much better than the present method. One thing certain, there is just too much government aid today, and it is destroying the very foundations of our country. People used to have ' a real backbone of their own and never thought to ask help from anywhere. If a person was in trouble back in the old days, the neighbors would get together and help them out. If somebody's house burned up, everybody would come together and help build it back. If a person got sick, friends would help nurse them. If the roads were bad and needed fixing, people would get together and help work on them, but nobody offers any assistance to one another very often these days. People were more sociable and I know they were better satisfied before all this government relief was showered upon the country. Taxes were practically nothing twenty-five or thirty years ago and now everything's taxed. This government relief has simply destroyed the morale of farm labor - has made the laboring class lazy and shiftless - has killed their will to do something for themselves. In fact, farming is not as satisfactory as it used to be all the way around and all because of government interference."
Approximately 3,881 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
Life History
Titles: TENANT TO TAXPAYER
Date of First Writing	December 27, 1938
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. Wilbur White (white farm owner)
Fictitious Name	Mr. John Black
Address	Marion, S. C., Highway No. 501 (rural)
Place	Marion County, S. C.
Occupation	Landowner (Farmer)
Name of Writer	Annie Ruth Devis
Name of Reviser	State Office
All names of persons are fictitious-places are true.
"When it comes to speaking of living on a farm, I'm a sticker," said Mr. John Black, "That's the life for me, I'll tell anybody.
"I just took a turn to follow up farming naturally, I reckon, for all my people were farmers as far back as we have record of them. The first settlement known of the Black family in Marion County was made over to Shiloh in the Wateree section, about 1800. I suppose that's how that long bridge next Peo Dee, called Black's Crossing, gets its name. That country was chock full of Blacks at that time. Both my parents come from over in that section and my mother was a Black same as my father."
Mr. Black lives on a 200-acre farm three and one half miles from the town of Marions he is a progressive and successful farmer, and an intelligent, public-spirited citizen. He bought half of his present acreage "way back yonder in 1919, when cotton wasn't bringing more than five cents a pound."
It's a four-horse farm, and Mr. Black uses no machinery at all except a couple of two-horse plows. Tractors and combines are not common in this section of the country, he says, and he farms "by experience," proud of being able to work out his own problems. He subscribes to several farm publications, but he feels that if a farmer tried to follow the advice given in the articles of these magasines on farming, he would go broke in a short time-the methods are just too costly for the average farmer of this section.
The Progressive Farmer has accepted a number of articles from Mr. Black, and he writes now and then for The Marion Star, a county newspaper. Since 1933 he has been County Committeeman for the "Triple A," which makes it necessary for him to work in the office of the Marion County Farm Agent on Saturdays.
"My grandparents owned acres and acres of land in their lifetime along with a bunch of slaves, but after the Civil War, they were stripped of all their niggers and lost about all their land," Mr. Black want on. "I really could not say exactly what my grandparents were worth before the Civil War, but I know they had nothing to speak of after it ended. There's quite a bunch of niggers by the name of Black scattered all over Wahee and Centenary sections of Marion County today who are more than likely descendants of slaves once owned by the Black family.
"Soon after the war was over, my grandparents died and my mother and father were left with very little-only a few acres of poor land, which they lost in the struggle to keep on. In the 1880's, torn up and discouraged by the loss of his property and weary with some of his family always sick from living in the mossy malaria section of Wahee, my father moved to Centenary as a tenant farmer. But times were tight along then and a tenant farmer had to scratch for a living, while the landowner sat back and raked in the wealth stored up by the hard labor of the tenant. As the years rolled by, my father moved from one farm to another, hoping each time that he might have the luck to strike a better place. Some years he cash-rented a house and small piece of land and other times he worked as a sharecropper. He preferred to rent for cash always as more freedom and independence was to be gained from this method.
"Finally, my father bought a few acres of land for $300.00 on the Dicks place near Centenary, where I was born in a log house in 1892. But he happened to hit on such a poor piece of farming land that he was never able to pay for it and after four or five years, he had to go back to tenant life, moving from place to place.
"Times were mighty tight with us along those days and if it hadn't been for Mr. Blackwell in Marion, I don't know how my father would have managed. When he needed anything, he would make a trip to town and go to Mr. Blackwell's wholesale store and trade two or three hundred dollars worth of stuff a year in fertilizer, cloth, sugar, and the like. Then at the end of the year, after he had collected from his crop, he would come to town and pay up his account. That usually took about everything he had made for the year, but it looked like there wasn't any other way around it. My father used to say that he had always lived a year behind the times and he expected it would follow him to his grave. And he continued to shift from place to place as a tenant farmer as long as he lived.
"In my childhood days, I went to Palmer School, near Centenary, and managed to pick up a right good little scattering of learning. A hundred pupils were enrolled in the school, though there were no standards at all to speak of. It was one of these old time two-teacher schools with no grades, no reports, and no promotions. One of the best teachers I ever had, I remember, was wild as a turkey but smart as he could be. I know I learned acre from that man than I ever expect any of my three children to learn from these educated teachers today. In my high school days, I went to the old Centenary school, which was graded and reports sent out quarterly to our parents.
"My children don't have any idea about the kind of school I used to go to. When I was a kid, I didn't think a thing of walking three miles to school every day, rain or shine, hot or cold. With my dinner in a tin pail and my three books thrown in my little homemade sack, I would leave home every morning by daylight and I never recall getting home in the late afternoon that I couldn't see our old kerosene lamp burning through the window from a good distance down the road. Now, my children catch the bus right at our own door about eight o'clock in the morning and ride three miles to a fine school in the town of Marion in no time. They get out of school at two o'clock and are back home every day not later than two-thirty.
"We children used to have no end of fun playing at recoss to Palmer School and Centenary. Used to play baseball, shinney, stoal chips, fox and dog, and Indian and American. One day, we boys took the girls by the hair and pulled them all over the school grounds. Oh, they fought and reared and pitched, but we took them by force and carried them off through the woods. You see, we were playing Indians and Americans.
"We used to have to walk the foot logs cross Reedy Creek, too, and that was a pretty dangerous business, though we children didn't know it then. Those foot logs were about a quarter of a mile long and the water was at least two feet deep under them. I was going across them one freezing day in January and when I got about middle way, I heard a man coming along behind me trying to make en old ox wade the water clear cross. The ox wouldn't budge and the man was standing on the foot logs just a-beating on the ox and yelling at him. It was such a sight to see them, I started walking backwards cross the logs and not looking which way I was going till it wasn't long before I fell off in the water. I had to run two miles in those wet clothes and every rag I had on was about frosen stiff by the time I got home. An experience like that would give any of those town children pneumonia today, but nothing didn't hurt us then.
"Twenty or thirty of us boys were going to school another time one morning, and we decided that it wasn't right for the niggers to walk the same foot logs as us. We all got together and said that we were not going to stand for it another day and something had to be done about it. We declared we would fix them that very day. Then we picked up all the sticks and old pieces of wood we could find around the woods and lined up on the foot logs to wait for the niggers to come along going to their school. It wasn't long before here come the niggers. We told them that those foot logs belonged to the white people and if they wanted to get on the other side of the creek, they would have to wade the water. They said they wouldn't do it and commenced pulling up lightwood stumps to throw at us and anything they could get hold of. Oh, we had war there for a spell, but we made then niggers wade that water before the fight ended. Dave Dale, he was in our bunch of boys and he was such a whale of a talker, I think he just outtalked the niggers. By the way, old Dave is a major in the United States Army today. He is a graduate of the Citadel and later taught mathematics at West Point.
"I remember one day a bunch of gypsies come along the road about time for school to turn out and when we children saw those long caravans of covered wagons, it nearly scared us to death. People used to tell us gypsies would steal any little children they say and we believed every word of it. Gypsies traveled in scattered groups of a dozen or more wagons, at that time, with a long space between them, but we children didn't know about that. Me and Max Rowell-just little bits of fellows at that time-jumped in the road after the first ones want by and started home. Soon we looked back and here come another dozen of them gypsy wagons. We scooted out in the woods and lay down in some gallberry bushes till that bunch got by. Then soon as we got good and started again, here come another string of gypsy wagons. Then another and another. Me and Max knew if we stayed on the road there wasn't no way keeping them gypsies from stealing us, so we cut cross the swamp and made for home. Went about two miles out the way, but we felt some proud to get home safe.
"When I was coming up, I used to walk to church often and sometimes my mother and father would let me stand on the back of their buggy and ride to church with them. I went to Terrace Bay Baptist Church part the time and to Centenary Methodist Church at other times. My father was a Baptist and my mother was a Methodist. Neither one of them were inclined to be very strong to any one certain denomination and I reckon that's how-come I've never stuck to any particular church. Me and all ay family attend the Baptist Church today and that suits me good as any, I suppose. I believe I picked up lots more going to Sunday School in my early days than children learn now. Mr. Rollins used to teach us boys there to Centenary Methodist Church and my, my, he could make a lecture. He would not only talk about the Sunday School lesson for that day, but also discussed any problems confronting the people at that time. In fact, I have never heard any man more instructive. But he was a sharp old fellow in more ways than one. We children used to have a habit of dropping a penny in the collection plate every Sunday and he told us that there wasn't any sense in wasting money like that for the church didn't need it. I've never heard anybody give advice like that to children before or since. But that was a penny-wise old fellow. I'll tell you.
"All through my early days, we used to have big Sunday School picnics on the river every year and that was one big day for all of us. Everybody would carry the nicest kind of baskets crammed full of good old country home cooking and we would cook what fish we caught right there on the banks of the river. We would always go in swimming in the morning and after dinner, all the crowd would gather around one wonderful old gentleman and listen to the stories he had to tell of his experiences. He was a veteran of the Mexican War as well as of the Confederate War. He was a great story-teller and would tell all kind of things of what he had seen. He didn't have one bit of religion about him, but he would tell Bible stories without end. The old man was very fond of his liquor and wherever he went, he would carry it along and take a. small drink before eating. But mind you, he wouldn't new offer nobody else none. Said it made his food go down lighter. I really think I received a good bit of education just from listening to his stories. He lived to be ninety years old and when he died, that was a great loss to the Centenary community.
"Another thing, when I was a boy, I was great to hunt and fish all night long, but I haven't tried my luck at either in fifteen years. When I was about seventeen years old, I caught twenty fish with a hook and line in no time one night and killed twenty squirrels another tine in twenty-one shots. I remember I waded clear cross Reedy Creek one day and killed a wild turkey that weighed seventeen pounds. Oh, we did enjoy those nights on the river bank. Wouldn't carry a thing with us but what clothes we had on, a frying pan, and fishing pole. After we had caught all the fish we wanted, we would make up a big fire to cook the fish and tell stories around. I did love to lie there and listen to the owls hoot and hear the river water running in the bushes. Occasionally it would come a rainy night and then we would be in a peck of trouble. Those rainy nights were about as miserable as any I ever spent. But it's not much fun to hunt and fish now since nearly all the land and lakes are posted these days, while the few places left open to everybody are kept cleaned up all the time. That's the way of the world today, I reckon, but when I was young, nobody ever thought of posting their land.
"Seems like sickness wasn't such a bear in my boyhood days either, and people ware lots more healthy than they are these times. It would take two or three hours to half a day to get a doctor in the country years ago. Usually the patient was either better or dead before the doctor got there. We had these old country quack doctors then who didn't know to give anything but calomel, soda and quinine, rhubarb, and asafetida-that was the limit. But one good thing, doctors didn't cost much then. The old time doctor would come to see a family all year and not charge more than thirty dollars for his services. And I hardly think he know what a prescription was like for he always carried his medicine with him and never had the occasion to write any. On the other hand, if he happened to be around anybody's house near mealtime, he would stop and cat with the family free of charge. Preachers used to do that too.
"To return to the subject of my education, after I finished high school, I hung around the farm until 1912 and managed somehow to save enough to go to a business school in Columbia. At the end of that year, I got a job as a bookkeeper for a man over to Bishopville, but I didn't like the work and wont back how to help my father on the farm in four months tine. That was in 1913 and though the outlook for a farmer seemed dull, cotton being down to five cents a pound, I figured I could make a better living on the farm than I had been making cooped up like a chicken in a little town office.
"I didn't get settled good at home before the World War started and as time went on, things picked up on the farm considerably. Tobacco prices began to rise and in 1917, times were booming with cotton selling for forty cents a pound and tobacco bringing thirty-seven cents a pound. In 1916, my father and I cleared $472.00 to every acre we planted, cotton bringing $200.00 a bale. Yes, everything picked up very materially for the farmers at that time. In fact, I consider that about the most prosperous period I have ever known. I went in the Army in 1918 and stayed until 1919, but did not go to France. When I got back home, crops still sold high and I bought my farm, where I now live, for $11,000 covering a hundred acres. However, I could not pay for it all one time. The depression came on in 1920 and cotton dropped from forty to twenty cents a pound, tobacco from thirty to fifteen cents a pound. My father gave up renting and he and my mother came to live with me. The year 1921 proved to be worse times, at which time both of my parents died. In 1923, prices began to pick up and I got married. In 1931-32, the boll weevil hit the farmers pretty heavy, but it really never has been a serious menace to any of us farmers since then. Things improved in 1933 and and in 1936, I finished paying for my farm. In 1936, I bought a hundred acres more of land, paying for it in four installments, which makes me own two hundred acres at the present time.
"In 1923, I bought my first automobile, a Ford Model-T; I bought a Chevrolet Coach in 1928, a Ford V-8 in 1934, and a Dodge Sedan in 1936, which car I drive now. I have three tenant houses on my farm, a large feed barn, stables, two tobacco barns and live in a seven-room house. In 1937, I added electric lights to my house to take the place of kerosene lamps and in 1938, I spent over $1,700.00 on furniture and repair work on the farm. Oh, I tell you it takes money to live these days.
"I make all the corn, potatoes, and vegetables I need to run my farm and always have a surplus to sell. Also, I make a considerable profit on my hogs and raise more chickens than we can use. During my childhood days, my father usually made from $200,00 to $400,00 money crop a year and the most he ever made was $600,00 in 1910. In 1937, my money crop amounted to $7,000, but not above expenses. In 1920, I made only three hundred pounds of tobacco to the acre, while I made 1,100 pounds last year; made thirty bushels of corn to the acre in 1920 against forty-five bushels to the acre in 1937. It takes about four or five hundred bushels of corn a year to run my farm and I sell two to four hundred bushels a year. Along with that, I use one to two hundred bales of hay a year to feed my stock on. Yes, there has been a tremendous crop increase since 1920, which is due to the use of more and better fertilizers on the farm. Although there is not as much land under cultivation today as there was during the Civil War, the average farmer makes a great deal more to the acre than he did then. My father considered a half a bale of cotton to the acre a fine crop and now if a farmer doesn't get a bale to the acre, it's a flop. Just like my father thought a two-year old hog was the ideal hog to kill, and now a six to eight months one is about right.
"But even with all the strides made in the last few years, living on the farm can't come up to what it used to be. Christmas times, people used to take a week off and now they hardly have time for one day. I remember people used to have neighborhood parties around to one another's houses and everybody that went had a good time. All of us stayed in the house, too, but I hear people complaining that when there's a party these days, they can't get none of these young folks to stay nowhere near the house. When I was earning up, people didn't know what a card was. Oh, we would have fine times at our parties playing all sorts of games that the whole crowd could Join in and have a little fruit for refreshments before breaking up for the evening.
"Well, it seems the old way of living was much better than the present method. One thing certain, there is just too much government aid today and it is destroying the very foundation of our country. People used to have a real backbone of their own and never thought to ask help from anywhere. If a person was in trouble back in the old days, the neighbors would get together and offer help. If somebody's house burned up, the people of the community would come together end help build it back. If a person got sick, friends would help nurse them. If the roads needed fixing, all the men would jump in and work on them. If a farmer lost his crop from hail, wind, or other misfortune, he did not look to the government to help him get another start in those days. His neighbors sent their teams and hands to his farm and planted another crop without delay, but nobody offers assistance like that to one another these days. People were more sociable and I know they were better satisfied before all this government relief was showered upon the country. Taxes ware practically nothing twenty-five or thirty years ago and now every-thing's taxed. This government relief has simply destroyed the morale of farm labor-has made the laboring class lazy and shiftless-has killed their will to do something for themselves. In fact, farming is not as satisfactory as it need to be all the way around and all because of government interference. This is true in the government restriction on the amount of crops one can plant, as well as the fact that all the hands (Negroes) want to work for the W. P. A. instead of for the landlord. However, in spite of difficulties, I like to live on the farm. Born on a farm, I expect to die on one."