THE GREEKS IN ROWAN COUNTY
There are nine Greeks in Rowan County, North Carolina, all men. Of these eight reside in Salisbury and one lives in Spencer.
In addition to these is one (Haber), a tailor by trade, who claims to be Greek, although born in Bayreuth, Syria, but other members of the colony claim that he is a Syrian and that he cannot even speak the language very well. As there Seems to be some secrecy as to his entry into this country, he will talk very little relative to his nationality or past. He speaks French fairly well and seems to make himself understood in Syrian, Greek and even in Italian. His physical, moral and social characteristics, however, seem to place him more in the Syrian or Armenian group. As the evidence weighs against his Greek antecedents, he will not be further considered herein.
Of the nine true Greeks, only one is married. This member of the colony, the outstanding leader, (Yancios) a few years ago married an American girl of an old and well-to-do family. They now have one son who takes his physical appearance altogether from his mother's side. Of the other Greeks one is a widower, the others bachelors.
They are fairly well distributed as to place of birth in Greece: one is from Salonika (Nicholas Yancios); one (Nicholas Felias) from Sparta; two are from Cyprus (George and Jack Kaniklidis) and are therefore British citizens; one is from Athens (Theodore Xenikos); two are from "The Islands" (Michael and Joseph Bakelbasis); and two from Samos (Mac and Joe Barnskilas).
In this connection it is rather interesting to the student of ethnology to note that there is a wide difference in the physical appearances of those from the mainland and those of the islands. The former are all stocky with swarthy complexions and black hair, while the latter are much lighter in complexion and have blonde, curly hair and blue or grey eyes. One of the islanders has red hair.
When questioned as to the probable cause of this difference, Yancios, the best educated, states that the difference holds good in the Old Country as well. He says that it is thought to be caused by the migration and infiltration of a darker people from the Northern Balkan States many centuries ago, thought by some to be the ancient Sythians or Huns, and later by Turkish and other Levantine blood being mixed with the old Greek strain. It seems that these migrations of darker people into Greece effected the islands but little and that the purest Greek blood today is found off the mainland. Those of Cyprus pride themselves that they are the last remnants of the ancient, great Greek race of the Golden Age of Pericles.
All of the Greeks in Rowan County were born in the Old Country; however, due to the fact that Turkey formerly owned and ruled the northern part of the present Greece, two were raised as Turkish citizens and two, as heretofore stated, reared in Cyprus are British citizens. Each and all of them learned the Greek language as their mother tongue in spite of their legal citizenship and those who went to school prior to migrating to America received their education in parochial schools and were taught by the priests of the Greek Orthodox Church. The Turkish influence, they say, was felt only in the cities and the larger, towns and no effort was ever made to establish Turkish schools or inculcate into the young the Turkish language or culture. They all speak English very well and three of them are polylingual.
All members of the Greek colony are communicants of the Greek Orthodox Church and belong to the Winston-Salem diocese, there being no local church of their faith. The county was formerly in the Charlotte See but was changed about two years ago. None of them attend church regularly; however, a wedding or a christening, especially the latter, brings them all to Winston-Salem, as a feast and entertainment always conclude these ceremonies.
It is the custom in the Orthodox Church for the parents not to be present when their child is christened, the priest and the godmother standing "in loco parentis" during this ceremony. Due to the fact that there are no local Greek women, godmothers for local Greek progeny are furnished by Winston-Salem or Charlotte congregations.
The American mother of the young Yancios, recently christened, objected rather strenuously to this absence from her child's baptism and to the stranger godmother, but both priest and congregation were adamant and it was pointed out to her that kings and czars had respected the custom and the rite for many centuries.
All of the Greeks are naturalized with the exception of the two from Cyprus, who retain their British citizenship. It is interesting to note that, upon receiving their American citizenship, they, almost without exception, adopt either an Anglicized form of their former Greek name or assume some pure Anglo-Saxon or Norman name. Thus James Raptoulous, now moved away, became James Ramsay and Michael Bakalbasis is now Mack Evans Mitchell. It is entirely speculative as to whether, after a generation or two, Raptoulous' grandchildren will don the Ramsay tartan and sing to the piping of "Casteal Fulis Na Theine", the pibroch of the Clan!
The colony has been greatly reduced in numbers in the last few years. Many of the elders have returned to a free Greece with no Turkish overlord. They are sadly missed. They were, as are the present Greeks among us, popular, honest and industrious citizens. No present member of the colony has ever been indicted in the local courts and, though most of them prefer to do business upon a cash basis, the credit rating of each is good.
Two of them gamble to some extent and all drink alcoholic beverages occasionally, however, none indulge in either to excess. They compose unquestionably the best class of our Levantine population in the county.
They all came to America after maturity and, with the exception of the two from Cyprus, none knew English prior to his arrival in this country.
Two migrated because they had relatives in Salisbury who sent for them and offered work. These came together and, though cousins, came originally from different parts of Greece. One came to avoid persecution from the Turk and one to avoid military conscription; however, the latter was among the first in the county to enlist in military service in the World War and has since held several offices in the American Legion. With the exception of the two who came over to join relatives, all landed in New York and worked there for a while before coming south. Each says that he has materially bettered his circumstances since his arrival. The one factor which seems to impress one and all is the freedom and liberty which they enjoy in America, as compared even to the mild monarchy and republic under is which they were raised. This is particularly true of the older ones who grew up under the Turkish regime. They state that one of the strangest things to which they eventually became accustomed was the knowledge after arrival in this country, that they had absolute freedom of speech, religion and opinion and that there was no confiscation of property or arrest without probable cause.
Several years ago there was an organization, of the Ahepa to which all belonged but due to the fact that so many have moved away to other parts of this country and a few have returned to the Old Country, the organization has been disbanded.
With the exception of one, who operates a shoe shine parlor and hat cleaning establishment, all other Greeks are engaged in one form or another of the purveying of food. Two operate fruit stores, two own sandwich and hot-dog stands and four own or are employed in cafes. One is retired and lives with his son.
They take little part in the social, fraternal or political life of the community and seem to have little social intercourse among themselves. Yancios, heretofore referred to, is an exception to this. Both he and his wife are socially inclined. His associates are mostly among Americans and he is a member of one of the country clubs and belongs to numerous fraternal, civic and social organizations. He states that, while he has retained his membership in the Greek Church and had his son christened therein to please his mother back in Greece, he will educate his child in the public schools, bring him up in all ways as an American and that it is immaterial with him whether or not the child ever learns the Greek language.
In their business and social contacts with one another the local Greeks almost invariably use the mother tongue; however, Yancios will not use it unless it is absolutely necessary and forbids his two- kinsmen who work in his cafe to speak it while there. This cafe happens to be the oldest, largest and best in the city.
When asked if there is anything in Greece better than they have found in America they give a variety of answers: the American girls are "too skinny"; the climate is too changeable; the wine is too sweet; the music is not so good; and the liquor (they here compare Southern corn whisky with their native white cognac) "too mean".
Mary A. Hicks
GREEKS IN RALEIGH
As of the 1930 census there were seventy-six Greeks in Raleigh, fourteen of whom were native and sixty-two of whom were foreign-born. It is estimated that this number by now has increased to approximately 250, including children. These people are divided among approximately seventy-three families, averaging about three persons per family and about thirty single people. There are a few Greek men married to American women, and one Greek woman has married an American.
These people are scattered well over Raleigh, some living in the best residential sections of the city and others living in the poorest, but in no case do any of them live in the Negro sections. Occasionally one finds a Greek family living in the same house with an American or renting rooms to an American. There is no so-called colony here, and a Greek home may be surrounded by American homes. The Greeks prefer simple house furnishings, but their standard of living compares favorably with the American's, some being among those who are poverty- stricken and some being among those who are rich.
The majority of the Greeks own or work in small cafes, but two of the better cafes, the Capital and California Restaurants, are owned by Greeks. Among other things, they own a dry cleaning establishment, a candy shop, a coffee shop, a grocery store, markets, rooming houses, and dry good stores. A few of the Greeks are stenographers and bookkeepers, and at least one is a tray girl at a local hospital.

The Greeks have no parochial school in Raleigh. The children attend the public schools along with the American children, and their ability to learn is placed at about an average with the American's. A few even attend local business colleges. All of the younger Greeks are literate, but many of the older ones can neither read nor write. That is the greatest reason why many of them have not been able to get their citizenship papers, but a few of them have neglected to apply for them.
The Greeks who remember their old land still love it, but they love America more. According to them, Greece has no opportunities for a young man. The factories and other public jobs are all filled, and that leaves the young man nothing to choose but the farm. The people are largely peasants and consequently own no land. Greece has a lot of culture, but most of the people there are too poor to pay for it. America offers learning to the poorest as well as the richest. The Greeks will always love their native land, for there are the only people who speak their language and really understand them. On the other hand, those who have never been to and who can't remember anything of their native land have no desire to go there.
The Greeks in Raleigh, especially the younger ones, find pleasure in all of the recreational activities of the average American boy and girl. They associate freely with all of their neighbors except the Negroes. At nearly all of the dances few Greeks are to be seen. They skate, play ball, play pool, swim, fish, go to the movies, and enjoy chatting with the American boys and girls.
A daughter of one of the prominent local Greeks in 1938 was chosen as Miss Raleigh to represent the Ahepans in the national convention. She was also chosen by the mayor and newspaper reporters of Raleigh to represent the city in the Tobacco Festival at Wilson in 1938.
The older Greeks seek very little recreation. They are content with their work, their religious activities, and conversing with each other. They usually converse in Greek even in the presence of Americans, but the younger ones speak in English.
Marriages are performed by the priest of the Greek Orthodox Church. A marriage performed by a magistrate is not considered legal by the Greeks. When the priest marries a couple the marriage is irrevokable, and a divorce is not legal in the eyes of the Church. The older Greeks discourage inter-marriage, but the younger ones think that it is all right.
The Greeks have three main ambitions: to become oitizens of the United States, to look and act American, and to make money. They also desire a good education and social standing. They have a rigid moral code, and most of them live up to it. However, their religious beliefs do not prohibit dancing and other forms of amusement. They trust strangers in general, and once you have their friendship it remains.
Since 1933 seven Greeks have been tried in the city courts of Raleigh, however each of these has been tried more than once. The charges have been such as assault and battery, careless and reckless driving, possessing illegal whiskey, receiving stolen goods, larceny, and other small misdemeanors.
The Greeks of Raleigh belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, and they maintain a building for the purpose of worship. Their services are long and impressive. They believe that this is necessary in order to impress the people with the sacredness and importance of the Church. There are no Raleigh Greeks belonging to any other church, but many of the local children attend Sunday Schools.
These people are very careful in the training of their children. The children are properly chaperoned and taught until they are eighteen years old. They are sent to bed at an early hour and are not allowed on the streets at night without their parents.
by

Mary A. Hicks
Why she gold his Greeks
Raleigh, N.C.
Paul Manos Appollonia, proprietor of Raleigh's Dixie Diner, was born in Asiatic Turkey, in 1890 where his father was in the army. Paul had better advantages than most Greek children in Turkey. He attended the public schools and received a fair education there. His mother, a Greek lady with at least one Turkish ancestor, was a proud beauty who got what she wanted out of life. Noblemen as well as peasants bowed to her when she passed, and because of her, Paul lived like a little prince for awhile.
In 1913 Turkey went under a new regime, and his mother's beauty and his father's military record had very little influence on the new executives. They were reduced to poverty and were in constant danger, besides. His mother had saved a few of her jewels, and these she sold to send Paul to America.
He knew no one in New York where he landed, and being unable to speak a word of English, he had a hard time buying food and renting a room. The next day he found other Greeks and then he felt more at ease.
He worked for awhile in a lunchroom in New York, and then he left for Chicago where, it was said, business was much better. While he was in Chicago some of his new friends left for Raleigh and he never forgot the name while he went from state to state working here and there. In 1929 he went to Asheville and after a summer there came on to Raleigh. He worked in several cafes here before he saved enough money to open his own place nearly two years ago.
He married Anna Manos, a distant cousin, who was sent to him from Greece, and they have two children, Chrisanley and Johnny, of whom he is very proud.
He speaks good English and thinks that it is very impolite for one Greek to speak to another of his race in their native tongue if an American is talking to one of them. If the man he wishes to speak to can't understand English, then he should ask the American to excuse him.
He takes very little interest in politics and never has voted, although he says that if he did vote he would be a Democrat. He likes the Government of the United States, and he thinks that Roosevelt is the best president the United States has ever had, and he has read about them all. He reads very little besides histories and a Greek newspaper published in New York.
He belongs to the Greek Orthodox Church, but he hopes that when his children are older the Greek priest will speak English entirely and the Church will become more American, or that his children will join the Presbyterian Church.
He is planning and saving to buy a lot and build a ten-room house. At present he and his family occupy a twelve-room house with ten others.
wg

Mary A. Hicks
GEORGE N. ELLISON
Proprietor of Raleigh Diner
Raleigh, N. C.
George N. Ellison, proprietor of the Raleigh Diner, was born in Turkey where his father, a gentleman of culture and refinement, tutored Turkish children. The Turks had captured him almost as soon as his education was completed to teach their children. He had married a beautiful Greek girl who was also a captive, and George was born in a Turkish Nobleman's house.
He was taught by his father to read and write at an early age, and he also attended the public schools of Turkey. At the age of sixteen he enlisted in the Turkish army where he remained until 1905. In 1906 he decided to come to America. It was hard to make a living there and he, with the other Greeks, had few privileges. He had heard a great deal about America, so in 1906 he boarded a ship for New York.
A cousin and an uncle met him when his boat docked and took him to their home in the Bronx. He began work in their little cafe the next week.
From 1906 until 1918 George worked in the Cafe and was happy. He received his citizenship papers in 1918 and was immediately drafted for service. When the War closed he returned to the lunchroom in the Bronx. He remained in New York se seventeen years longer, serving as chef and waiter.
He was satisfied with his work in New York -until letters from his cousin in Raleigh made him long for a warmer climate. He didn't know until the letters began coming how he dreaded the severe winters and the intense summer heat. He had married a New York woman who was very fond of the city, but as they discussed the fine climate and people of North Carolina she decided that she would like to come, too. They wrote, asking the cousin if he could give George employment in his lunchroom, and when the answer came they were ready to leave.
It was in the spring of 1935 when they came to Raleigh, and George began working in the lunchroom. They moved into the apartment house with the cousin and his wife, two children, and three other families. It appeared that things were going to turn out beautifully for the Ellisons.
George worked for his cousin for three and a half years and he kept adding a little to his savings, although he made only $15 a week. Seven months ago he opened a cafe of his own, hired a chef, an assistant chef, a waiter, and two waitresses, and announced that he served home cooking.
His diner rapidly became one of the town's favorite cafes, and he found it necessary to hire another waitress. His boast is, "Once they eat with me they come again."
His greatest ambition is to give his daughter an American education. He wants her to attend the University of North Carolina to study for a school teacher, and he wants her to forgot her nationality completely and to be an American only. He hopes that she will marry an American boy, but he wouldn't object if she married an American Greek.
He and his wife belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, but he wants his daughter to belong to an American church when she is old enough to know which church she prefers.
He doesn't believe in women voting and doesn't vote himself, but he hopes that if his daughter ever votes it will be the Democratic ticket. He says, "Democracy is the world's greatest government. They say that it was known in Greece many centuries ago, but my people in Turkey couldn't have known much about it. Americans don't appreciate their Government enough. They couldn't unless they had lived for awhile in Turkey or in Greece, expecting the Turkd to capture or kill them daily."
wg

Mary A. Hicks
<text not clear>
Peter Gournas, proprietor of the People's Cafe, was born near Pergas, Greece, in 1888, the son of a peasant farmer. There were six children in his family to be supported from the small but fertile farm. On this farm was grown a variety of things such as cotton, grain, vegetables, and fruits.
Peter attended public school for four years, then he began working on his father's farm. In 1912 prices dropped and a heavy depression struck the land. Starvation seemed to be facing the Greeks and many of them migrated that year. Most of them were coming to what they termed "the prosperous and blessed New World."
The Gournas family had friends scattered about over the New World from whom they heard now and then. Peter's parents, were anxious for him to come and join them over here where they reported plenty of work and that they were getting fat. But they were puzzled as to the source of Peter's finances for such a trip. Finally, in September, they sold all of their wine and most of their stores which they were saving for winter in order that their son might go into the New World to make his way.
There were many immigrants sailing that day for America, and Peter Gournas was among the many. The rooms on the steamer were damp and dirty, and they were going into a strange country; but they were happy.
The boat docked and Peter was soon through the Customs. There was no one in New York to meet him, but he knew where he wanted to go. He went to the station and asked for a ticket to Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; but no one could understand him as he knew not a word of English. Finally he found someone who could understand him, and that person purchased his ticket for him.
He arrived in Bethlehem and there was a friend to meet him. This friend took him to his home, and in two days Peter had a job in the steel mills, making $12 a week. He saved his money, and every time that he had saved $50 he sent it home to his parents. This continued until he received a letter from home, stating that his father had a job and that he need not send them any more. Then Peter began to save for himself.
By 1915 he had saved enough to start a business of his own, but he wanted to find some other place. So he started out to look for a good place to invest his money. Raleigh was the place he chose, and he established his cafe in its present location. He had his wife and two children with him then.
This place of business is located on one of Raleigh's main business streets, the street on which most of the business houses serving the country people are located. These places also serve a large amount of Negro trade. For this purpose Peter has two entrances to his cafe, one for the white people and one for the Negroes. He employs three people all of whom are Greeks.
Business wasn't so good for him at first, but he served good food at reasonable prices and soon built up his trade. He didn't know anybody in Raleigh, and most of the Greeks were not very friendly to him as they were in the same kind of business. But when his business became good he had plenty of friends.
He became a citizen of the United States in 1923 which made him happy. He could then vote, raise his children as Americans, and, best of all, he could remain here until he died.
Peter's wife died on August 6, 1932, and after she was buried he lit a lamp and has burned it ever since. This shows that one of your loved ones is out at night and the lamp light is to guide him home. It is done to show that he hasn't forgotten her and that he wants her back at home.
Peter is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church and votes the Democratic ticket. He likes to think of himself as an American and includes himself when speaking of both the Greeks and Americans. He is opposed to Greeks marrying anyone other than another Greek or an American. To marry anyone else is making his race even more foreign over here.
The upstairs of his place of business is used as his living quarters. The rooms are well-furnished. One room is used as a junk room, and the cooking is done downstairs in the cafe.
AHB

Mary A. Hicks
Steve Loomis-----------311 W. Hargett St., Raleigh, N. O,
THE LAND OF PROMISE
"In my old country, near Sparta, Greece, the farms lay broad and level like they do on good land in Amerioa. we raised grain and vegetables mostly, but there were miles and miles of vineyards with all kinds of grapes. Those grapes were used to sell fresh locally, to ship fresh, to preserve and to make wine. We make fine wine in the Old Country. There were also miles of orchards containing orange, lemon, grapefruit, lime, olive and other fruit trees.
"Our cities had factories too; cigarette factories, clothes factories and many other kinds. The difference was that there was not so many people and not so many factories. We had trains, subways, street oars end other modern conveniences when I left there twenty years ago. It's got a lot better since then, I know. "My father was a farmer but not a peasant because he owned a little farm. There were eight of us children but two of them died when they were little. We worked hard, but no harder than in A merioa. We had a home and food and clothes and they weren't so different from America.
"When I was about six months old my oldest brother came to America with my uncle. When I was six years old another brother came with two of our cousins. My father came soon after that and until I was twenty-seven he came back and forth about once a year. My mother and we children farmed and my father sent us some money. He worked in a clothing store in Chicago.
"From the time I could first remember I heard about America, about the Jobs and the kindness and that there weren't no men that could make you pay fines or go to jail. I heard about the big country and the millions of people that worked. My father said that everybody here was busy and that the bustle was pleasant. He won't no farmer and he didn't want to farm but there won't nothing to do but work in a factory or on the farm, and Greeks made better farmers than they did factory workers.
"I went to the public school for five years but at the time I decided to come to America I couldn't speak or write a word of English. My uncle said that he could find me a job and he wrote my father to sand me. Father was old and worn out from much work then and I was twenty-seven and no job but to farm, so he decided to let me come.
"I kissed my mother good-bye at home because it showed that a person was low-bred if he cried on the street. Father went with me to Athens and bought me some clothes that looked more American and he shook my hand when I got on the train.
"I got on the boat at Liverpool, England, on the twelfth of April with a ticket that allowed me to travel in the steerage. I folt lonesome because there won't nobody I knew on the boat but there were two or three Greeks from Athens and we soon got to talking. The trip was long and tiresome to some of the people on the upper deck but to us down below it was short. We talked and sang songs of our native land and we hoped that we'd hurry and get to New York, and yet we dreaded It. We had heard about the promises of America and like all Greeks we were suspicious.
"I will never forget when we docked at New York. All of the Greeks on the ship had somebody to meet them. I felt lonesome enough to cry as they left me, but pretty soon a gentleman came up and said that he was my uncle. With him was my brother that I didn't recognize. We walked along the street and laughed and talked, then we went to see some friends of theirs and we all talked until midnight. The next day we got on a train and went to Chicago.
"My uncle was as good as his word. Ha got me a job in a little mirror factory. The owner was a Jew from the Old Country and he couldn't understand me, nor me him. My uncle had to do all the talking. He didn't work me mighty hard and he paid me 10 a week. We made the little mirrors that ladies carry in their purses. My job was silvering the mirrore and it wasn't hard. I worked eight hours a day. I worked there for two years.
When I got the chance of a job in a pool Troore in Chloogo at $12 a week I took it. I was across town then from my folks and I couldn't speak English hardly at all. I got embarrassed many times. I'd go in stores and couldn't ask for what I wanted. I'd have to look until I found it and point at it. I couldn't understand money very well either, but I was learning at the poolhall.
"When I had been in America for three years my cousin came from Athens thinking that I could teach him English. I couldn't speak it myself and with no more education than I got I couldn't help him. When we heard a word he'd say look it up in the dictionary. I'd look it up and he could pronounce it but I couldn't, he'd understand it and I wouldn't but neither one of us could speak it. He could understand and not speak and I could speak but not understand.
"I worked in the poolroom for eleven years and I learned a lot during that time. I got me a dictionary that gave the Greek and English and I studied it hard. I learned about simple words first.
"I had a friend that worked in the Majestic Radio factory and he helped me to get a Job there for $20 a week. My Job was to see that they were put together tight and that every radio played right before it was shipped. I had a lot of odd jobs to do but I liked the work fine. One year I stayed there and then I got laid off.
"One day my friend asked me if I had saved up any money and I told him that I had a little over $500. He said that he had a little more than I did and he was going south and open a eating place. He asked me to go with him. We thought it over and decided to come here because we both had relatives here. Greeks are like that; they like to stick together.
"It was in 1933 we opened this place and everybody said we'd go broke because we were right in the middle of a depression. We managed fine, though, because Mr. Roosevelt was president and he saw to it that the people had money to spend. We made as good then as now. We sold more but prices weren't so good.
"I didn't know a thing about cooking. Most folks think that Greeks were born knowing how to cook, but they weren't. Greeks have always been good cooks, so they think, 'Greek out of a job; where to look?' Then, 'people must eat; Greek good cook.' See they just put two and two together. I had to learn to cook just like anybody else, but my partner knew how to make weiners, barbecue, and all the other things that a joint is supposed to serve. I got started off right and now I know.
"You know what my biggest ambition is? It's to be like Americans, to be just an American. I can't, though, no more than the other old Greeks can. Now the young generation will be Americans and lose their nationality after awhile in spite of the old people and the church. The old folks say that the old home is the best and they a lot more difference in the two countries than there is. They Say we're Greeks with a civilization of thousands of years before Christ and that America is a new raw country. They want to keep the Greek blood pure.
"The young Greeks feel different. They marry the Americans sometime; they go to school with them and play with them. The old people don't like it, the church don't like it, but it's working out fine, I know a Greek boy educated here who married an American girl and they are happy. They want through and years of school together and she knew his people and his ways. They were married in the Orthodox Church and she goes to church with him. The Greeks have accepted her as one of them and she is trying to get them to be more American: I don't think that marriages between Greeks and Americana usually turn out well. It is embarrassing for the American to be in a Greek gathering and she usually don't like Greek food. When they have Children they're not clear blooded and therefore have no nationality. I hear that no American has a nationality except just being an American and Americans are. composed of all races and tongues, but I think that a person shouldn't lose all sense of his nationality, Fifty or a hundred years from now, when the Greeks have become Americanized, marriages with Americans will be all right but until then they stand a mighty good chance of turning out bad. They are yet too different. Our church allows it if the couple married in the church and if the American changes to our faith. Of course no Greek marriage is legal to the church unless the marriage is performed there. Divorce is strictly forbidden by our faith.
"Our church might sound stern, but it's really not so strict as some of the others. I can dance, sing, go to see boxing and wrestling matches, go to theatres or anywhere I like. I can shoot pool, play ball or do any of those things. My religion hasn't a thing to do with the way I treat folks. don't steal, lie, rob or murder simply because I don't want to, even though I do believe in hell and heaven. I was baptized when I was about five months old and that was really when I joined the church.
"We fast during Lent and eat no meat at all, not even eggs. All the rest of the year we eat what we please. Easter is celebrated by Greeks in all countries and so is Christmas. Over here we observe all of the national holidays, like the Fourth of July.
"I think the Americans are right about celebrating that day and Washington's birthday. We have our heroes too. We love to talk about Homer, Xerxes, Lysander, Cyrus, Alexander and others. Their histories are forever talked in the old country. We in America haven't forgotten.
"The Greeks made Democracy hundreds of years ago, but the Romans captured Greece and kept the Greeks in subjection for many years. They forced Greek teachers to be servants to them, teaching their children. One goes to Rome now and admires the things made by Romans. They didn't make them, the Greeks did, but they get no credit for it. Greece was free for a hundred years and then Turkey overthrow it. Our people have now been in subjection to Turkey for 500 years. Our history is great and sad.
"The Jews and other nationalities have been treated badly too; worse than we have, and we are sorry for them. We do not associate with each other. I hate Negroes, and I wish that the Government would give them a state by themselves and make them live in it. They are planning to rule the white man someday. I nearly killed a Negro once because of it. He said that the Negroes were climbing and that they would someday rule the white man. I held a sharp butcher knife to his neck and talked to him, then I kicked him out of my joint.
"Some people have to cater to Negro trade but not me. I make around $30 a week clear and I don't want to get rich. I'm not married and so I live cheaply in one room in a Greek home. I eat here mostly, too. I can get by on $4 or $5 a week easily. Sometimes I wish that I had a family to work for and some fine children to become Americans. I wish that I could be an American citizen all the way.
"I've been in the United States for twenty years and I'm not a citizen yet; that is, I haven't got my papers yet. I applied once but my application must have been lost in Washington, I've sent another one now and I hope to become a citizen. I love America, but I love my native home too. Greece is the land of culture, the land of peasants and few opportunities; America is the land of promise, the land of freedom and equal opportunities. There are poor people here, but no peasants.
"Before I left the old country I did well to have one poor suit of clothes every year. I never had spending money and we ate coarse food. Now I can afford two or three suits a year and eat pretty much what I want to. I pay $3 for my room and eat out. Sometimes I eat here and sometimes I eat at other places.
"I like rooming with the Greek family I live with. If I were to get siok they'd take care of me like my mother would. Some think that I need a wife whether I love her or not, but no love no marry's what I think. I would like to have maybe two children, though. I believe, with the other Greeks in America, that small families are best. In the old country everybody believes in big families.
"You wouldn't believe it, but the Greeks are not superstitious. They do not believe in goblins, ghosts, witches and other things like that. We are nearly as bad about hero worshiping as you Americans.
"We have nearly the same games in Greece that you have here. We play Drop the Handkerchief, only there's no kissing, London Bridge, The Farmer in the Dell, and a lot of other games I see played here is played there. I know some Greek songs but I can't say them or write them in English; they don't make sense like that. They are beautiful in Greek. I mean the old Greek language the one used. for thousands of years. The modern Greek has changed somewhat from the old."
Steve clasped his hands and his brown eyes roved along the shelves with their rows of beer, ale, tobacco, cigarettes, chewing gum and tomato juice, A fly lit on the bald spot on top of his head and he brushed it away before he said huekily, "Yes, America's fine, but sometimes I get homesick for the old country and my mother that I haven't seen in twenty years. I'm going back one of these days, too. Not to stay, but just on a visit."
by

Mary A. Hicks
<text not clear>
John Popa john, forty-eight years of age, has been in the United States since 1905. He was born near Sparta, Greece, where his father was a farmer. He came over here with his uncle who was seeking his fortune. John's father did not object to his son stopping school, for he felt that money and security meant more than an education. He was illiterate himself.
John and his uncle went directly to Milwaukee where they both found employment in a cigar store. Later he worked in a billiard parlor, then he went back to the cigar store. He traveled extensively, working in each town he came to and looking for a place to settle permanently.
John spent two weeks in Raleigh in 1912, but he seemed unable to decide that this was the ideal place to settle. He returned in 1925 and worked until 1927, then he was off again to find a better place. In 1933 he returned and opened a lunch room which he soon lost. Since that time he has worked at different lunch rooms all over town. He is now employed in a grade B lunch room owned by his son-in-law, but he is still thinking of an ideal place. He likes Raleigh, but it is not the Utopia he imagined.
His father sent him a bride from Greece in 1915. They have only one child, a girl, who was educated in the public schools of this country. She married an American Greek, and they have one child.
John has not received his citizenship papers yet, although he has applied for them three different times. The first time he applied he was informed that a fire on Ellis Island destroyed the record of his landing. He tried again, but that time was unable to read the Constitution. He now hopes to get his papers within thirty days.
John believes in quiet and privacy, so there are only five people occupying the seven-room house in which he lives. Nearly all of the local Greeks live in crowded apartments. John says, "A house full of voices is a house with little thought."
by

Mary A. Hicks
<text not clear>
James E. Stathacos was born in Hrypapha, Sparta, in 1882. His father was a peasant farmer and had great difficulty in feeding and clothing his wife and three children.
James' uncle was in Roanoke, Virginia, and he carried on an occasional correspondence with the family. He wrote glowing accounts of America and told them that they should send James to him even though James was but thirteen. He reported that there was a place in America for everybody. His parents talked to him about James, and he was so eager that they permitted him to stop school and come as soon as his uncle sent him the necessary fare for passage.
James was lonely on the boat. He was homesick and afraid of the seemingly endless expanse of water. He traveled second class but spent most of his time in the steerage talking with the other immigrants of his nationality. They tried to cheer him, out he was miserable, even when his uncle, whom he did not recognize, met him in New York.
They rested and went sightseeing, then they boarded a train for Roanoke. His aunt was as strange to him as his uncle had been, and he wished and wished that he had remained in Greece. He had hoped that he wouldn't be sent to school, but his uncle top him that he was expected to finish at the local graded school. But he had to first learn English before he could enroll.

James finished the seventh grade in Roanoke, then he went to work in a local drug store. In the meantime, his brother came over and got a job nearby, so that made James very happy. He worked at two or three drug stores and at candy stores, then he went to California where he did the same kind of work.
Seven years ago James came to Raleigh to work for his brother in the California Fruit Store. He had saved some money, so when Royster's Candy Company, a store with a high reputation, was offered for sale he bought it. And he has prospered since that time.
In 1923 James' mother wrote him that it was time that he was considering matrimony and that she knew just the girl. His mother felt that she would like for her son to marry a girl whom she knew. James wrote to her, saying that he would marry the girl if he liked her when she landed in New York.
Stella had relatives in New York whom she could visit indefinitely so, accompanied by her father, she went to New York to meet her intended husband. James met her at the boat and they immediately fell in love with each other. They were married in an elaborate ceremony and he brought her to Raleigh to live.
Stella learned a little English the first year, and after she came to Raleigh she learned slowly. She helped him in his business, and he learned that her flashing smile and gay greetings helped him more in his business than did his aloofness.
In 1925 he received his citizenship papers, and that same year his first child, a girl, was born. She is shy like her father. The same is also true of the second child, but the third, a boy, is gay like his mother.
James sends his children to the public schools. He can well afford a private tutor, but he prefers that they have an American education. Because he wants them to be Americans, he sends them to the Sunday School at the Church of the Good Shepherd. He and his wife belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, but they object to its location. In the first place, it is next door to the Salvation Army building, and the drums disturb the Greek worshipers.
Both James and his wife take an active part in local and national affairs. He studies politics and selects the men for whom he votes with great care. He reads several newspapers, including a Greek newspaper. One of his chief regrets is that he knows so little about his native land.
In 1933 he and his brother visited their homeland. His mother was living, and her request to see her sons before she died was the chief reason why they returned. James was disappointed in what he found over there. He had expected to see broad streets, palatial homes, and large vineyards, but he only found narrow streets, small homes, and struggling vineyards.
Soon after that visit his mother died. He is glad that he made that trip, but he says he sees no reason for ever returning again. He is an American, and he looks so American that few people suspect anything else.

Mary A. Hicks
JAMES THEODORAKAKAS
James Theodorakakas was born near Athens, Greece, sixty years ago. His father was a farmer, but the climate was too dry for him to make anything. Once in about five years there would be enough rain to keep the fruit from parching. Year in and year out the family faced starvation.
James was unable to attend school, for he had to help his father support the other six children. He married young and lived in the house with his father. He tried to find work in Athens, but in vain, and his thoughts kept turning toward America. But he knew if he came that he would have to leave his wife and he would have a difficult time trying to learn English. He discussed the matter with his wife, and it was decided that he should come and then send for her and the child as soon as possible.
In 1908, a very hard year in which to get food, James' father sold his little farm in order to get enough money to pay for James' passage. On the trip he was seasick, homesick, and lonely. Some of the other passengers made fun of his clothes and of his stuttering. When he arrived in New York the only thing that prevented him from returning was lack of money.

After getting off the ship, James walked for hours. He became so tired that he slipped into an old warehouse and went to sleep on some burlap bags. The next morning he went to a Greek stand where he bought a cup of coffee, and there he found a Greek to whom he could relate his troubles. The Greek was sympathetic and offered him a job in the kitchen. He couldn't be a waiter due to his inability to understand and speak English. He didn't make much in New York, and what he did make he had to send to his father. So he began to look for a better job. His employer suggested Chicago, so to Chicago he went.
He had learned enough English to be a waiter, and he was fortunate enough to get the first job for which he applied. He worked there for two years at $15 a week and was able to save $100 in the meantime. Then he traveled through several states, working here and there as he was able to pick up odd jobs. When he reached Raleigh he decided that this was an ideal place to locate a cafe. He had visions of opening a cafe, of making money, and sending for his wife.
He looked around for a place, but he soon learned that $250 would not buy a very nice place and he would have no capital to back him. But he found another Greek who was planning to go out of business because of lack of funds, so he told him how much he had and they became partners that day. He trusted his partner; he had to, for he couldn't read and write. But while he dreamed of sending his family money they were going broke, and they were entirely bankrupt before James realized that anything was wrong. He then lost interest in living for awhile.
He was soon able to get a job in a small place at $6 a week and board, and he lived in a room with nine other Greeks. He was even able to save money then, and he saved enough to erect a fruit stand. From that he makes $15 a week and sometimes a good deal more. He is saving again, hoping to send for his wife and child who is a grown woman now.
James belongs to the Greek Orthodox Church and is very religious. He says that the average American does not have enough religion. He has twice been denied citizenship because of the fact that he cannot read and write the Constitution of the United States.
It is with great feeling that James says, "America, I love her. She good country with plenty of food and plenty of work for all. My country too dry to farm except fruit. This country good land, good to poor Immigrant, but to have her I give up my family all my life and can't never be a citizen of her."
AHB
