Rose Shepherd
No. -193
April 17, 1937.
JACKSOBILLE (SUBURBS)
RIVERVIEW and RIVERVIEW TROPICAL GARDENS.
Lem Turner Road,
Personal Interview,
Dr. E. H. Armstrong
Dr. E. H. Armstrong, owner and developer of "Riverview" of delightful medium priced home suburb of Jacksonville - a tract of Approximately six hundred acres - with twenty-five acres of swamp and drained and developed into "Riverview Tropical Gardens" - is a native of Khode Island. He humorously says: "The first loud sound that impressed itself on my memory, was that of the high waves of the rock ribbed Atlantic Shore of Rhode Island, slapping against Narragansett Pier! But that did not last for long, as while a still very small boy, I came with my parents who settled in Marion County. That was over sixty years ago, and the little towns of Altoona, Umatilla, the larger cities of Eustis and Leesburg, have sprung up in the prairie-lake section where as a young man I heard cattle.
"I was never able to make much headway as a cattleman, and with $15.00 in my pocket I arrived in Jacksonville in 1880. Mechanics had always interested me as a boy, and I was fortunate in securing a place with the S. B. Hubbard company, then a going concern in the lively metropolis of Jacksonville, and was placed in the shop. This experience was of untold benefit to me, as I was there during the period of much progress in mechanical development. I had the pleasure of working under Mr. John Eining who, white connected with the Hubbard Company, worked on his automobile inventions and also the steam whistle, the latter making him famous.
"I saved my money, as I had met a most wonderful, girl, and she still is - the present and only Mrs. Armstrong, and we were married in pensscola in 1880. I then went to New York and studied Opthalmology, and came back and practiced for many years in Jacksonville. That's Why they call me "Doctor."
RIVERVIEW:
"However, I had a dream - a dream of medium priced homes for future citizens of Jacksonville, and so I began to look around for a place to start. This section North of the City limits of Jacksonville a wilderness then of winding cowpaths and hog trails - was on the mark and I bought six hundred acres and stared. That was twenty-five years ago - and my dream is just being realized.
"The property has a mile frontage on Ribault River, which of miles down empties into Trout River, a tributary of the St. Johns.
"In this sub-division, no water accumulates in the low places we have hills in Riverview that are 90-ft. high, and from these hills on a clear day one can see the tall buildings in the down-town section of Jacksonville spread out like an air-plane view.
"We have all city conveniences - streets, 16 miles of them, two of them paved, and the rest graded and graveled. We have two big artesian wells, one of them furnishing all the water supplied by the "Good Hope water company," operated by my son, a $100,000. a year business. In fact, it enjoys the largest sale of any bottled mineral water in Florida. During the world war, when thousands of men and officers were housed at Camp Johnston, (SIR) the Government paid us on a yearly contract $10,000, for water supplied the officers, men, Hospitals, camp kitchens, etc" We hauled it out by bus and trucks by the ton.
"These two wells furnish two and one-half million gallons of water every twenty-four hours, with a natural pressure of 28-lbs. There are 60,000-ft. of water lines and mains thruout Riverview.
"We have one hundred homes, all occupied, and a $65,000. Drammar School.
"The homes built during the last year have been under the Federal Housing Administration, totaling around $100,000. The entire Riverview development represents an outlay in cash of approximately $200,000. - buildings, structures, and developments - work in general.
"The development has been laid out with the idea of easy identification - the Streets running East and West and the Avenues North and South.
"Riverview is one and two-tenths (1.2) miles from the city limits of the Northern boundary of Jacksonville. There is double bus service from the Northern side of Hemmimg Park, the fare being 15¢ each way.
"Records in the county Tax Assessor's office show that the development has added $10,000,000. In taxable property to the rolls of Duval County."
CRANKLESS ENGINE:
Dr. Armstrong has found time in his busy life to invent a "Crankless Diesel Engine" - (See drawings attached) - which created qui a stir in mechanical circles and was written up favorably in different trade magazines. Plans were formed to manufacture it, the company organized, but the "Black Friday" stock market crash of 1928 brought an aprupt close to a promising business venture, and nothing has been done about it since. Dr. Armstrong says the shock was so great, he suffered a complete nervous break-down, was sent to New York City for treatment, and while seriously ill, was erroneously pronounced "dead," a wire was sent to the Jacksonville papers, and a few weeks later he returned home much improved. To read his own "obituary."
RIVERVIEW TROPICAL GARDENS.
These unique Gardens, adjoining Dr. Armstrong's Home place, and a short distance from the business section and stores, are patterned after a similar development at Rio Janeiro, Brazil, South America.
A twenty-five acre swamp has been drained, the surface water being carried off into the Ribault River a mile away. A driveway passes thru to the River, bordered on each side by palms, which in a few years will meet overhead, forming in reality "An Avenue of Palms," as it is rightfully named.
One hundred tons of sand mixed with cyster shell has been piled in to make the winding trails and foot-paths thru the tropical verdure of native growth. There are an estimated 14,000-ft. of these trails covering the spongy root-growth of the swamp bottom, and walking along them gives a delightful springy effect of treading on tan-bark.
One can spend hours in this tropical garden, the view changing with each direction. It is estimated there are 100,000 each of lilies, both the rod and yellow, which will be in full bloom about the middle of May different specie of palms, and many different kinds of Azaleas.
On Valentine a day, Feb 14th, of this year, the Azaleas were in full bloom, and the public was invited to Come and view them without charge. Over three thousand people passed through the "Golden Gates" With the beautiful sight. There are fifty varieties of Azaleas.
One trail is marked - "Trail to the circle of Roses," and there they are, 1,000 of them, all varieties, soon Blooming thruout the summer.
One unique attraction is a tall century old red bay-tree, called "The Mystery Tree" with pure clear water flowing out of the trunk from an opening 16-ft up. In a niche to the left of the opening is a bust of president Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Dr. Armstrong says a similar tree in Virginia has been flowing for 100 years.
There is also a magnificent specimen of Brazilian Rubber Tree, while towards the center of the gardens is A group of sweet Bay trees, which bloom in June, July and August, the white petals falling on the ground like snow and spreading their sweet odor for a mile around.
An attractive artificial lake is called "Lake Pocahontas" the surface entirely covered with "parrot moss" in great demand for fish-bowls, and visitors are good-naturedly permitted to take all they wish.
There are many rod-bay trees, cypress, yellow pine, in addition to palms and other native growth, all in the greatest profusion and in their natural setting. Italian cypresses 20-ft-tall. Native honeysuckle, Wisterias, ivy, and the lovely Coral-vine are being trained on overhead wires and up the tall trees and in years to come will present a picture beautiful to behold.
Other plantings include satsuma orange trees - 100 of them -from which were harvested last year 2,000 oranges, and a considerable grove of Chinese Tung trees several years old.
To make the Gardens more realistic, Dr. Armstrong has "built" tropical animals as a setting for some of the scenery - a giant white elephant of concrete - 6-ft. high and weighing twenty tons - stands <text not clear> chained to small stake. great American eagle weighing around a quarter of a ton, perches high on an old live oak stump, and there are lions, tigers, bear, and in unexpected quarters tiny Imitation dwarfs keeping guard over secluded sections.
Dr. Armstrong is very much enthused that the Director of the united States Geological Survey in the Topographic map of Jacksonville and vicinity in September 1928, included the well platted area of "Riverview" and the "Riverview Tropical Gardens." Estimated 15,000 visito last year. Public is invited to visit the gardens, no charge.
An automobile-drive around the property starting at Soutel rive which leads into Avondale in a 15. S.B. directions on a two mile "loop" thru the sub-division substantiates the claims for its high look tion and the beautiful water frontage on Ribault River, along which are many modern homes of various types of architecture. Some frame building of two and three stories, with spacious porches, sun-rooms and living quarters, others of the "Argentine" style - of hollow tile and concrete construction, with flat walls, recessesd entrances, low hung windows and flat tile roofs; Also Spanish homes and bungalows in profusion, but all in good condition.
Dr. Armstrong estimates an upkeep cost of $15.00 to $20.00 per day is the present average expense to his company, and mentioned having just purchased three tons of paint to re-condition some of the older dwellings.
The River-front lots, the most valuable, are 300-ftt deep. A modern "sea-walls of steel and concrete construction protects the property from overflow or erosion. This extend the whole mile of the River frontage.
A corps of workmen are kept busy throughout the year in building designing and repair work, and five men are constantly at work in the "Tropical Gardens.
Rose Shophard
Interview 66
April 28, 1936.
II- HISTORICAL (Maudarin)
Mrs. Ruth J. Banes,
426 Florida-ave.
Jacksonville, Florida.
Mrs. Banes is a great-grant-daughter on her mother's side of Jacob James. One of the early Settlrs of Mandarin, who is buried in the old Sloon demetery on the banks of Julington Creak, and on her mother's Wide is <text not clear> from the Budin family.
Mrs. Banes says: "My great-grandfather Bardin came from England with John Bowden in the 17th century from a country village called "Mandarin trees 'Mandarin Orange Trees," from which their now home because known as "Mandarin" Florida. This information is considered authentic, has been <text not clear> down in our family, and is on file in the State Archives at Talla-hasses an being the correct data as to how the town of Mandarin received <text not clear> name.
"Great-grandfather's wife was Mary Hagin, of St. Augustina.<text not clear> of the Statin family, who were directly connected with King<text not clear> of Spain. When great-grandfather Bardin died, his widow married me friend, John Bowden. The late Uriah Borden, prominently connected with salry Duval county history, was her grand-son.
"Jacob James' mother was Sarah Churchill, sister of John Churchill of Marlborough, of England.
"The early English settlers of Handurin were all wealthy people.
Obtained large land grandson which they established themselves and lived in great luxury. They had many vloves were not concerned with work or professions, as we know them today, and were ladies and gentleman, indeed There was no struggle, except common defense against the Indiane, and they were all good neighbors, The mother bus vorsed in the efficiency of the nut roots and herbs, and nursed her family through favars and minor childish afflictions. I was married when I was twenty-one, and it was that year I first can a physician's <text not clear> to be filled at the local drug store.
"My family first had holdings in Orange Park, but on account of the isolation as compared with the more Thickly settled town of Mandarian, they bought the old General Loring place on Julington Croek in the Northe section of the county and located there.
"The Loring plantation had previously belonged to the Hott family son of this family, George S. Mott, of New York, met and married a Saming <text not clear> princess, according to the scared tree of the tribe, without going Throughwith the formality of telling either the princess or her tribe that he had a wife and several children in the State of New York. After a year of to, he left his parent's home of her parents in the State of New York. He was gone for two years. The next morning after his return to Mandarin, he went to the spring for a pail of water, and a welldirected eyes, as he stoopad to raise the pail. The Indians carried off the body to a nearby valley and executed over it their fiendish war dance. An old slave woman on a nearby plantation. Aunt Hetty Forrester, was an eye-wishess to the affair from a place of concealment, And heard the blood-curdling war-hoops of the Indians afterward. George S. Mott's body was later <text not clear> returned to the home of his parents, and buried by them in the kid cemetery at Mandarin. According to the records, this happened on May 18, 1836, now 100 years ago.
(Mrs. Banes -Mandrin History)
"My grand-father James, had a six-foot brother, who starching out his arms, many times as a front walked across the ST. Johns River to visit in "Cow Ford" as Jacksonville was know in the early days. The River was very shallow, the water coming up only to his chest. When cattle were driven across, the only place they were compelled to swim was in the current in the middle of the River for only a few feet.
"James James was educated as a physician, and was really Doctor James. But for his services during the Seminole Indian Wars, he was given the title of Captain, and was really better_known_by that. He and Col. Michintosh were great friends.
"I have among my possessions a letter to him from Col.<text not clear> comnsnding him for deeds valor, also other paper, deeds and <text not clear>. I also have my grand-mother. Mary Hugin Bardin Howden's passport visit her family in St. Augustine during the war Between the State <text not clear>
<text not clear> the second interview - April 29, 1936, Mrs. Banes has promised to us cure these old documents for the writer's inspection, and give addition al data).
St. Elmo W. Acosta,
Former Jacksonville
Park Commissioner,
133 East Bay Street
Jacksonville, Florida
Rose Shepherd, writer
ST. ELMO W. ACOSTA
Mr. Acosta was seen at his store, 133 East Bay Street, corner Newnan and Bay Streets, a little late for his 2 p.m. appointment. His small white delivery truck, embellished with slogans in bright red, advertising the Various brands of goods he sells to the hotel and restaurant trade of Jacksonville and environs, has become a familiar figure to local citizens as he personally delivers orders, and as soon as he had parked the truck ho began giving rapid directions to his one assistant regarding supplies for special deliveries he was to make at the Beach later in the afternoon.
The assistant had just completed sweeping out the store and placing newly delivered cartons of goods in their proper places on the shelves, and was carefully watering a few plants in the sunny show window - a pepper plant, a small sago palm, and an avocado tree about three feet tall. "I raised them all from seeds," he said, as he carefully mired a black—powdered substance with the soil in the three pots. "This stuff is over a million years old. Got it from the lime and makes it soft as rain water. He gets it somewhere up in the Pennsylvania coal fields. Mr. _Chic (Mr. Acosta's nickname) always likes to have flowers and plants around."
Mr. Acosta coming in now, apologized for being late, stating he had had a busy Saturday morning and that his, orders were increasing from week to week.
Mr. Acosta is a heavy-set6 man about five feet nine inches in height, with olive skin, graying hair and small piercing brown eyes that look straight at you. He speaks rapidly, with his chin elevated and his head thrown back, and as he seated himself on the ledge of the show window, he said;
"Well, if we are going to make this a life history, we better go back to the beginning, or maybe a little before. I am a direct descendant of Pedro Menendez, the early Spanish governor, and my relationship comes down through the Alvarez family. My great-grandfather, Antonio Alvarez, was also a Spanish governor, in charge of the records and administration of affairs through authority from the Spanish crown. The Alvarez family gave the bells to the old Cathedral of St. Augustine, which are still a prized relic on the property, and have been frequently written about in articles on the ancient history of Florida. These wear my mother's ancestors.
"My great-grandfather, George D. Acosta, owned the 'oldest house' in St. Augustine, which was sold to the St. Augustine Historical Society after the death of my grand-mother.
"Just recently I turned over to the Jacksonville Public Library for the Florida Room, a letter written by Governor Alvarez during a siege of St. Augustine by the English in the early days.
"My father was George F. Acosta, and my mother was Ella O'Hara Acosta. I was born in Jacksonville on January 12, 1875. The family home was on the corner of Adams and Market Streets. My mother died when I was two years of age, and my father when I was seventeen.
"I stared to sell paper - the Florida Times-union and the Jacksonville Metropolis, the latter an evening paper, when I was six years old, and I continued selling newspapers in my spare time until I was twenty-one. No, I did not make much, not that I didn't try, but we were not paid as much as the newsboys get now.
"When I was a small child, I attended the Convent School conducted by the Catholic Sisters at the corner of Main and Monroe Streets. Later I went through the Central Grammar School, and for a year or so to Christian Brothers College, a Catholic school for boys, at Memphis, Tennessee.
"When I was about fifteen years old I took a job as office boy with the Railroad of Georgia, in Jacksonville, and after a period of fifteen years' service, rose to the position of assistant freight agent. Then the agent died. In the adjustments following, I thought I was entitled to promotion to his position, but other arrangements were made, so I quit. I immediately engaged in the brokerage business, which I continued for ten years, then got stung by the 'political bee,'" he chuckled.
"I was elected to the City Council first in 1910, and re-elect in 1914.
"In 1913 I represented this district in the State Legislature for a period of two years.
"In 1919 I was elected a member of the City Commission, serving sixteen years.
"When a boy, I was always interested in gardens and flowers. I studied flowers, their likes and dislikes, and when I was elected to the City Commission, it was a great joy to be made Commissioner of Parks. I always wore a rose in the lapel buttonhole of my coat and it was not a gesture of affection, but a genuine love for flowers that prompted me, "he said decidedly.
"One of the first things I did when elected to the City Council in 1910 was to try to got an ordinance through to purchase the Home Telephone Company. It was a dial system and could have been purchased at that time for $106,000. If the ordinance had gone through, this would have been quite an asset to the city, and now we would be able to have this home-owned service at a very nominal rate. The system was later purchased and became a part of the Bell Telephone Company.
"While a member of the state Legislature in 1913, I advocated a great deal of constructive legislation. One, a bill, was introduced in the house, but failed to pass the senate, required every country to plant 3,000 oak trees each year. If this law had been passed, the highways of Florida would now be shaded with double rows of beautiful oaks.
"I succeeded in having passed a law that the counties should pave and maintain a road through the main street of towns of less than 3,000 inhabitants.
"Another law I advocated was that subdivisions within five miles of a city should have their-street paving in line with such city streets, saving countries thousands of dollars in having to change their paving, or build branch connections to adjacent subdivisions. The law, in modified form, was passed by a succeeding legislature.
"At my own expense I brought down two well-known city manager from Northern sections to study our municipal forms of government. I am an advocate of the city manager form of administration as a satisfactory and economical measure for the people, which, in a great part eliminates graft.
'I presented a bill to the legislature to give to the city of Jacksonville title to all islands in the St. Johns River dredged up by government operations to widen and deepen the channel, between here and Mayport. These could have been formed into beauty spots for picnic grounds and outings, and in case of opidemics some could have been used for isolation purposes.
"I tried for years to get the island, only a few feet underwater off Memorial Park, built up and made into a section driveway from Riverside to the Ortega section.
"I stared agitation for the St. Johns River Bridge on September 4, 1904, and I passed House Bill No. 1 in the Legislature in 1913 granting authority for the building of that bridge. I dug the first spadeful of earth when construction was actually stared September 25, 1919, and there's the spade," he said, pointing to To a rusty spade suspended in the show window. "The bridge was decided and opened for traffic July 1, 1921. I worked seventeen years for that bridge and spent $5,000 of my own money in efforts to get its established.
"The beach, or Pablo as it was called in early days, was not popular as a place of recreation because it was so hard to ge to. It was a hard drive over the long sandy road. Later there was a shell road built through the Hogan section, called the Hogan Road, which was conducive to more traffic. But after the completion driveway to Jacksonville Beach was promoted by the citizens of Duval County, at a cost of $750,000, with an additional $400,00 for bridgos across the several streams on the route. I gave deed No. 1 for the widening of the sand road to the double-track paved road.
"I advocated the planting of holly, oak, and magnolia trees as a memorial to the soldiers of the world war. That did not carry, but my plan of city lighting for the beach road was put in operation.
"I advocated for years the building of a canal from the St. Johns River through Julington Creek and was one of the prime movers in the first plans for a cross-state canal.
'I helped plan and was vice president of the association formod for the construction of the short cut from Valdosta into Jacksonville. This road is now being built.
"An association was formed for the intracoastal canal through Lake Harney in the Leesburg section, in which I was also interested, and made several trips to Washington to get satisfactory figures on the cost. We now have the canal in satisfactory operation with an average depth of two and one-half to three feet, to accommodate shallow draft boats.
"At one time the site of Fort Caroline was offered for $5,000 and I tried to get Duval County to purchase it and maintain it as a park for its historical value. They had the money and I was instrumental in having the flaw passed in the legislature to buy it, also went to Washington at my own expense in an endeavor to get the government to assist in the project. It was finally sold for $70,000, and Duval County's golden opportunity was gone forever.
"I advocated filling in the swamps between Jacksonville and the beach along the Atlantic Boulevard, about ten or twelve of them, making a series of islands and lakes on each side of the highway. Mrs. Jennings finally carried out the idea in four or five of these swamps, but nothing has been done towards their beautification.
'Early in my term as Park Commissioner. I established the city nursery - the only one in the United States, by the way - where the city raises its own trees, flowers, vines and shrubs for beautifying of the city parks and streets, as well as furnishing them free to the citizens who wish to embellish their own premises. I have taken out flowers by the truck load to the parks, distributing them grafts to the citizens, both white and colored.
"There are also other 'firsts' in my administration. I built the office building in Confederate Park for closer and more convenient contact with Jacksonville citizens. I built the first bridge - a concrete structure - across Hogans in the city parks; made possible the first free band concerts, and fought for a Municipal band, which finally materialized in the Jacksonville police Band. I put in the first swimming pools and public drinking founta.
"Years ago, at my own expense, I erected fifty concrete benches for people to sit on while waiting for street cars along the route.
"As a waterfront park location, I advocated the city purchase all the land between Market and Hogan Streets along the St. Johns, and beautify it as a city park. We do not use our wonderful waterfront as we should.
"One of the most outstanding system of parkways I advocated was a driveway two miles wide through Duval County, starting at the ocean at Fort George, with a bridge across the river, then along the canal and back around by Fulton into Atlantic Boulevard. My idea was to sell all but a half mile on each side of the road dividing it into ten-acre homesites, which would have paid for the The original cost of the right-of-way and maintenance. I would have had it planted for one-eighth of a mile with yellow jasmine, the next eighth with wisteria, and next eighth with another color, all native Florida flowers, and so on, alternating stretches each side of the roadway. It would have been a thing of beauty and utility, and different from any other driveway anywhere in the world. Thus an could have driven out Main Street, turned into, say, Lem Turner Road, then into a grand circle swing through the roads and connecting parkways to the ocean and back into Jacksonville.
"I remember, too, when people laughed at my idea for individuals to have their names on pins on their coats, as a gesture of friendliness. Enabling people to more easily get acquainted. Now, the officers in banks have plates on their desks with their names in plain view, the floor men have their full name on pins on their names in plain view, the floor men have their full name on pins on their coats, the barbers have their chairs marked with their names, and ladies wear pins with their initials on their dresses and handbags uh, well, how times change!
"When I was a city commissioner, I advocated building an auditorium on the property owned by the city on Market Street and Hoga Creek, and at the last bond election, it was gratifying that of several sites presented, the people overwhelmingly voted for the market Street location.
"I was also the prime mover in efforts to obtain the city-own airport, golf course, and radio broadcasting station; also started the initial movement for the municipal docks, and later their enlargement to their present capacity.
"Another thing I advocated was taking the sewerage out of the St. Johns River and putting in a reduction plant; also extending the present newer away from Ortega along the St. Johns River and a the length of memorial Park, doing away with the pollution of the water in that section. In my opinion, the city will sooner or later have to put in a reduction plant.
"Another progressive measure I fathered was the construction of a span from Hogans Creekc connected with the St. Johns River brid which, if it could have been accomplished, would have relieved the congestion of traffic at Broad and Bay Streets, which is such an inconvenience at the present time.
"As another means of relieving traffic across the river, I firmly believe in the re-establishment of the ferry service. Mr Gibbs still has the franchise and is perfectly willing to operate his former ferry service from the Flagler Street docks to this side.
"Former Mayor, John Alsop, and myself were the first to advocate the Riverside Viaduct and the Davis Street Viaduct, and I Started things moving which later resulted in the establishment of the Beaver Street Viaduct, also the Duval Street Viaduct to the cast Jacksonville section, al though Johnny Callahan actually compiled the latter.
"I took over the city too when it consisted of a bear or two a fox, a few birds and an alligator, moved it to its present Main Street location and made it into one of the best zoossin the count. I spent two years collecting three thousands dollars by public subscription and donations from school children to buy Miss Chic the elephant - which has afforded so much pleasure to the younger element.
"During my administration I enlarged the city park system to a grand total of about 300 acres. I had all the land donated to city for the widening of Main Street and Talleyrand Avenue, and urged the buying of Boone Park, 32 acres, Kooker Park, 3 acres, and several other little parks where they were needed. Chio Acosta.
"At one time, I spent three or four months walking the streets of Jacksonville, making memoranda of defective side walks. I would start out at five o'clock in the morning, so as to cover as much territory as possible without interruption. Rou see, a great many of the old time sidewalks were of large flat tile, which would sink during heavy rains, leaving holes. People would stumble and fall over them, then sue the city for broken bones and other injuries they sustained. These got to be quite an expensive item. But with my notations as to locations, the defects were remedied, concrete walks replaced the old-fashioned tile, and the injuries and damage suits stopped.
"I had vestibules placed in the streetcars, so as to protect the motormen from the public; also instigated placing of asbestos curtains in all theatres, so as to insure safety to the public in case of back-stage fires, and framed the law preventing admission of public to any theatre unless a seat was available.
"Another city law I had passed was requiring the publishing of names of people when they changed addresses. Persons had the habit of moving, without giving their new address, making it impossible for people they owed to locate them, also causing inconvenience in mail delivery. Now a record is published daily by all transfer and moving concerns, giving names and addresses of persons whose goods they have handled, where moved from and where to.
"As another feature of beautification, when I first entered the city council, I had passed an ordinance requiring telephone poles and trees along the sidewalks to be in line. This prevents the setting of a tree or telephone pole so as to jut out in irregular lines.
"As a relief to heavy traffic, I advocated the building of a roadway along the Atlantic Coast Line Railway from Dennis Street to Ortega, and I am pleased that the street is now being opened up along this route.
"I tried years ago to get the city to buy commodores point, also the Reed Pearson tract, which measure lost by one vote. It would have been a great assot now as the navy air base. I even started to raise the purchase price myself of $16,000, by obtaining subscriptions from individuals to be paid at the rate of $8.00 per year but it was too much of an undertaking for me and I let it drop.
"When I had money I used to subscribe to everything that came along. I donated $1,000 to the St. Vincent Hospital building fund and $25.00 for the purchase of Camp Foster as a commissary.
"Jacksonville at my first recollection was a town of about 5,000. When my family moved to a new home at First and Main Streets, I had great fun raiding the nearby orange groves. Seemed like I could never get enough oranges. Then we boys used to get in a boat and row down the river to a large estats below 'Keystone ' the Episcopal Boys Home, where there was a fine orange grove. One day the caretaker was a little too quick for us, and as we entered the boat, our pockets crammed with fruit, he shot several times, not at us, but in the air, so as to frighten us away. I yelled back at him "Never mind some day I'll own that place myself.' So years went by and it was a happy moment for me when twenty-eight years ago I put the dead for that twenty-five acre estate in my pocket. I suppose you may call that one of my ambitions, for it was never out of my mind after I started to earn a substantial salary.
"My family of three sons and three daughters has been reared on that place, practically. At first we only used it for a summer home, then after the bridge was completed, it was more convenient to live there year round.
"I now have about twenty acres in bearing orange Satsuma, and grapefruit, also pear and plum trees. The other five acres takes in the homesite and some native and tropical plantings along the river. I have kept as many of the age-old live oaks and magnolias as possible. Also have a number of native holly and the beautiful Christmas-berry tree The old house is just as it has boon for fifty years, with some needed repairs, but I did build a new porch around the east and south. It has about 180 square yards of floor space, which Mrs. Acosta thought was going to be a lot of trouble to keep swept off, but I made the floor of red tile that can be easily washed with a hose. We have our own artesian well, with running water and hydrants all over the place.
"My oldest daughter is at home, and my youngest son, Chic, Jr. is going to school at the University of Florida at Gainesville. Than other children are married, and all living in Jacksonville.
"Chic, Jr. often stands in front of me beats his chest and says: "Book at me Dad; your son, and I never stole an orange in my life! ' But I get right back at him with-well you did not need to. I raised oranges for you in abundance.'
"He is away right now in Ann Arbor Michigan, where yesterday he entered a swimming contest. He has been champion in Gainesville and in the city meets, but after two days on the train, and with no opportunity to practice, he came in second yesterday. But this record will give him the privilege of competing in other college events," he said proudly.
"I forgot to say I was a passenger on the first mule-drawn streetcar, and I kept the other kids out by snatching their hats and throwing them as far as I could down the street, so they could have to stop and pick up their hats. By that time the streetcar would be too far away for them to catch up. I also rode in the first electric street car. The first line went down Main Street and over Duval to Market Street, I mean, the mule-drawn cars, and the end of the line was Eighth Street."
"I used to ride a bicyole, the old style with the high wheel, and a won many a race at the beach.
"I also had a lot of fun playing baseball, and we boys played 'shinny' - now they call it golf.
"We were living at Phelps and Main Street when the soldiers more encsmpod nearby during the Spanish American War period. I would have liked to join, but had had no training, and they would not take volunteers. Wish they had, as now I could be drawing a pension," he chuckled at this.
Yes, I've had a busy and interesting life. First a newsboy, then in the railroad office, my own business as a broker, the two periods as City Councilman, a session with the Florida State Legislature, sixteen years as City Commissioner, and now in the whole sale grocery business.
"It's a 4 o'clock now you'll have to excuse me" he said, apologetically, "as I have some fruit orders to take to the hotels at the beach, and I'll have to be hurrying along.
"If I think of anything else that should go in this history, I'll jot it down, and if you come by next Saturday, I'll have it for you.
"One incident I forgot. A little Japanese got off a Clyde Line boat one day and rushed out to my office in Confederate Park, asking - Are you Meester Cheek Acosta?" I told him I was and he said: 'I come to you to learn of ze Florida trees and flowers. I told him he had arrived at the right place, and put him in my car, taking him out to the nursery where I explained everything as best I could, then rode him all over town showing him Jacksonville's homes with their beautiful lawns, trees and shrubs. That night when he left he said: 'Good-bye, Meester Cheek. When I get home, I send you an oak tree like this - indicating a height of about eight inches - 'four thousand years' old.'
"That was ten years ago, and I am still waiting for the 4,000 fear-old oak. Maybe it got swallowed up in an earthquake, they have had two or three since then; or maybe it was destroyed in the Russian-Japanese War; or maybe the little fellow himself was lost in the conflict. But at any rate, I would like to have seen a 4,000 year old tree only eight inches high, wouldn't you?"
As he walked toward the open door, he glanced out and saw a Jacksonville police car with two officers driving rapidly west on say Street, and he said: "I nearly forgot to say that when I was a City Commissioner I initiated the movement to put patrolmen in automobiles, to enable them to get over their beat more quickly. This has turned out to be a great thing, as now these cars are equipped with radio, making it possible to apprehend criminals more easily and in a shorter time, resulting in greater police efficiency.
"The biggest thing in my life? Making possible the great St. Johns River bridge for the people of Duval County.
"And the greatest thing in my personal life is our beautiful home on the St. Johns River. This was originally known as the old Armstrong place, descending to his nephew. Oscar vdn Valkenburg, who later sold it to Mr. McGeery, and I purchased it from him twenty-eight years ago."
July 17, 1939.
St. Elme W Koosta,
Former Jacksonville
City Commissioner, in
Charge of Public Parks,
133 East Bay - st.,
Jacksonville, Florida.
Rose Shepherd, Writer.
ST. ELMO W. ACOSTA (Additional)
Mr. Acosta, interviewed on March 27, 1939, on Jacksonville history his own life history, sent word that he believed he had emitted some important information in his previous interview, and aske and writer to call again that he might supply this data.
Mr. Acosta had made an appointment for 2 p.m. He had completed his round of wholesale deliveries of special brands of cannod goods and "Lettuce Loaf Mayonnaise" to the local and suburhun hotel trade. The Little white, red-lettored truck, which he drives himself, his corpulent body leaving small space for a companies on the narrow seat, stood idle at the curb. The tall staff with its iron windmill disc "No Parking police Regulations" had been removed from the yellow-painted restricted pavement front, and rested behind the front door until speaking time tomorrow morning 6 a.m. Business was ever fer the day.
A shipmont of standard brand canned peas occupied the center of the store, while now shelves reaching to the oeiling lined the walls and were completely filled with other articles of merchandise he carries regularly in stock.
"Looks like business is pretty good," I ventered.
"Well, yes, we have a much larger stock than when you were in the store in March. That forty cases of peas just arrived this morning. The canners notified me their goods would be advanced in price after August 1st. as this has net been a good season for peas-drouth up the country, and they did net fill out - so that canners would not be putting up any now stock this year. I have a good trade on this particular brand, so I fell their argument and stocked up with all I could afford.
"You know I completely forget to tell you before that I was president of the South Jacksonville Association that <text not clear> that suburb to city of Jacksonville. That was an important post, as South Jacksonville was in the 'dumps' - so to speak - a heavy municipal debt, he commercial gas, old houses, poor streets, and many of the yellow-painted frame buildings of Florida East Oeast employees, and a network of tracks used for the F. E. C. switching operations. There was considerable opposition from Jacksonville authorities and businessman to taking us under their wing.
"But we talked, and we campaigned, and we finally made the 'powers that be' conscious of the advantage of including us in the Greater Jacksonville plan. Now look at the south side - beautiful homes line the riverfront, with well-kept estates around the bends of the St. Johns, a well-paved read to the Jacksonville Beach section, so much traveled that now there is another read under construction shortening the distance to the ocean - Beach Boulovard, traversing the old Hogan Road right-of-way, to relieve traffic congestion. The improving of the old farms and plantations which have been laid out into city lets or which have been build magnifb'cant modern homes it is really almost unbelievable what has been accomplished on the south side of the river in the past ten years, unless you have lived there and soon it grow, like I have.
"While I was a member of the Jacksonville City Commission, I was the first one to advocate the use of voting machine to combat illegal and corrupt voting practices, and actually brought the first voting machine to Jacksonville.
"Another thing, I tried for years to put an efficiency man into the city government, a man who would go from department to department, studying operations, and presenting his recommendations for improvement or economy in administration of its affairs, so that things would be on an efficiency basis.
"I tried for eight years - through two governers' administrations to establish a State school for police officers, taking boys sixteen years of age or older, who wished to become Policeman, giving them special and intensive training for this work. I wished to have the school attached to the penal institution at Raifond, where they could observe criminals first-hand. The course, as a planned it, would cover a period of six years. If it was anticipated that Jacksonville would require ten additional policeman then we would take ten young men from Jacksonville and train them so that at the end of six years they would be efficient law-enforcing officers, instead of receiving appointments on short notice on account of family connection with some city official or by political preferment; if Baldwin needed one, then we would take one from that section, and so on throughout the State, a new class starting each year. It would have developed into a strong, efficient, State-wide system of intelligent police protection that would have been of untold benefit to the citizens of Florida in economy and Protection.
"I tried also to influence two governors to insist on three sessions a day from the beginning of our State Legislature convening every two years. They have three sessions at the end when bills have accumulated and there is a rush of work when everybody is tired, and it is impossible to accomplish anything intelligently. It would probably have saved the tax-payers a lot of money, too, and done away forever with the extra session idea. The 1939 session of the Florida Legislature was a farce - they accomplished nothing, but spent about a half million dollars of the tax-payers' money, putting all city officials and public employes on a pension basis after more or less service.
"Another thing I advocated as a protection to the residents of Jacksonville and other large cities, was the appointment by the Governor of Florida of six under-cover men known only to him. These men would work in connection with the Fodorak Beard if Investigation, getting the names of dangerous criminals, murderors, etc., at large or headed for Florida. They would simply locate those desperadoes and communicate with the Governor who would notify the sheriff of the section or county where the criminal had been located, and he would be turned up on agent notice, while the informant would remain unknown.
"As Park Commissioner, I was the first to advocate the purchase of a park for the Brentwood section -27 acres which later materialized and has developed into a fine city park.
"As a drive showing the beauties of Duval County, I wanted the county to buy a 100 feet strip all the way around the county, taking in the beaches, leaving a sixty feet driveway in the center and beautifying twenty feet on each side of the roadway with different kinds of evergreens and flowering shrubs, and other native, plants. I else wanted to establish a wide driveway from the old seaport - Mayport to Jacksonville. This is a beantiful drive.
"I was the first to take missletoo out of the trees in the city and suburbs, on account of the killing of one man by this parasite.
"Also started a campaign against mites in rookeries, as they sometimes cause fires.
"I wanted the city to provide a fund of $100,000 for comfort stations at convenient locations - a was successful in getting one or two in public parks, but the politicians killed the measure, as well as another appropriation I asked for - a fund of $100,000 to spend for entertainment and amusement of the tourists who demo to Jacksonville, and if proper co-operation was offered would spend considerably more than that amount annually. Now, they go to south Florida and other sections where definite inducements are made to the 'stranger within our gates'.
"I advocated the county taking over the Heckacher Drive and making it a toll-free road to the Eastport section. I also wanted to establish a ferry from Ft. George to Mayport, connecting up with the Heckscher Drive, which would have made another beautiful circle-drive to the beach and return.
"I advocated the city acquiring the FEC right-of-way roadbed, and making a road 150 feet wide from South Jacksonville to the beaches.
"I advocated a city-owned two hundred feet circle in the retail section in San Marco Blvd. in South Jacksonville, so that people might park their cars and shop without police interference or danger of their cars being damaged by rushing traffic in that section."
At this time a woman passing the store, stopped in to inquire the name of a plant of unusual beauty on a table by the front door.
"That is a sage palm, ma'am, "explained Mr. Acosta. "I planted the seed in the tub last December, and it has just come up. Here are some of the seed," he said, taking up a handful of hard yellow pods from a pasteboard carton, bearing a siga, "three for 10?."
"The sage is one of our most beautil palms. It takes the seed six months to germinate, but the plant grows very slowly, putting out only seven of those feathery fronds a year. A sage thirty years old would be about six fost tall. The cold does not hurt this species, and it grows outside, as well as in greenhouses. They bloom in the fall of the year and the soods mature in December and January.
"It is quite a sight to see the large spider which infest these palms. They spin their web during the day, like a small wheel, and then sat it up and spin another the next day. The viscid thread they spin is part of their necessary diet. They are very formidable also, when they attract a flying reach to their web, and feast on him, making a spread as large as a small succor, with their big bodies, their long legs and the reach."
The visitor took three of the yellow seeds, and after receiving some instructions as to their planting and the preparation of the soil for the pet in which she planned to start the growth, went out after profusely thanking Mr. Acosta for his trouble.
"Well, to get back to our story," said Mr. Acosta, "I forget in my other interview to say I was the first one to advocate that Duval County purchase a part of the old Reed Pearson tract adjoining Camp Fester - 380 acres, to be exact comprising the site of the old Camp hospital during the world War. It could have been bought for $80,000. I went myself to public spirited citizens and secured $16,000 in donations, so that the city would have had to spend only $64,000. The city council would not approve the plan, and it lest by a tie vote. The Government had already spent about $200,000 on the site in improvements of different sorts.
"Now that Camp Fester has become to the site of the recently apportioned Government Air Base for the use of the Navy, if Jacksonville had taken my plan through twenty years ago, now they could have cashed in on their investment, as that property is in demand.
"Do I remember an A. D. Barnett in the history of Jacksonville. No, there was old man W. B. Barnett, and his sons B. H. and Earlow.
"There was an Arthur D. Basmett, however, connected with the firm of Ambler, Marvin and Stockton [sic], that operated a bank in the early 1880's whore the consolidated Building now stands. Basnett was a New York man, was quite smart, and had a responsible position with the firm. I believe he later want into business for himself as a kind of business broker; he was a lawyer, also handled A. M. Reed's affairs.
"The Barnett Bank was first established on the corner where Furchgott's store now is. Mr. W. B. Barnett died long years age. The bank was started in this location in 1877.
"No, I never know any Henry M. Stanley, a newspaper reporter, of Jacksonville. There may have been a Stanley, but it was not the famous Henry M. Stanley, the Englishman, who was sent after Dr. Livingston, the explorer in South Africa, who wrote the famous "In Darkest Africa' Published in the 1880's.
"You know, people of Jacksonville have forgotten about things that old 'Chic' (his nickname) have done for them, and I have been thinging as a means of attracting attention to my wholesale grocery business, to run little advertisements in the reading columns of the daily newspapers like, 'St. Elmo W. Acosta, as Park Commissioner, first advocated purchase of voting machines. Buy Lettuce Leaf Mayonnaise.' Or 'St. Elmo W. Acosta originated a plan in 1925 to train police of the State of "Lorida, giving them a six-year period in a State owned Police School. Buy Lettice Leaf Mayonnaise.'
"Politics have become so corrupt in Florida, and especially in Jacksonville which is practically machine-owned by crooked politicians, that I have no desire for further service in this connection. I neglected my own business to such an extent while I was in Politics that it has gone down to nothing, and my only desire now is to build up my grocery business until I can make a living at least, and pay my taxes. I sold one house this last month, which helped me considerably, as the tenant owed me $500, rent, with me possibility of collection. But I had't o sell it to got him out, which gave me a nice down payment and an income of $0. Per ment for ten years. Of course, I may have to take it back, if things do not break right for the new owner, but at least I paid a juicy tax assessment on say other piece of property this morning, together with $20.00 interest. If I can. I am going to keep on selling until I out down my holdings, and just keep my estate on the river on the south side. Where I hope to die in peace if the roof don't fall in on me."
