1508 St. Louis Street
McKinney-1
JOHN ANDERSON HILL
"The p'culiar thing about a railroad man,
He tamps his tracks and he don't give a damn.
When his work is done the handcar takes him home, He eats, takes his bath and then starts to roam.
This song explains in full the life of a railroad man the life of John Anderson Hill who spent forty-five of his sixty-five years "tamping thighs" on the tracks of the T. P., S.P and the Public Belt Railroads. "My life was like the whistles of the trains...I only blew when there was danger ahead...aint had no limit and I didn't mind no work," John says. Although he is an old man...he is on the D.P.W (Department of Public Welfare)... John is still full of pep and claims that he could work now if his heart wasn't bad.
He is a short, black fellow with a bald head and a wrinkled face; he weighs about one hundred and fifty pounds and lives in the rear of a private home, a single cottage. He rents his one, dingy room from the woman who lives in the front, paying one dollar and fifty cents per week. John sleeps with a mosquito bar over his iron bed, "that's because spirits don't git under mosquito bars," he says. There is an old oil stove in his room which he uses to cook on and warm himself during the winter months. On his unpainted walls are several boxes that are used as shelves.
A small antique lamp "firnishes "light and serves as a "guidance" whenever John has to go about in his yard or sneak a woman into his room. If this seems strange for a man John's age it is because "a railroad man got devilish ideas in his head until he's plum dead."
John sat on his bed and smilingly related what is here as his life history; he was happy that somebody had come to talk with him about "old times," which were sometimes up and sometimes down. Very often he had to scratch his bald head like a doubtful child to recall his experiences. Of course, there is a lot that Joh omitted, but he did not do so intentionally. This ex-railroad man is very congenial and cooperative. "I likes to make friends b'cause you never knows who can help you, I philosophies," states Mr. Hill. He spoke softly and confidentially.
"Son, ten minutes after ten o'clock on October 10 I will be sixty- five years old. No, I aint married, mo. I'm a railroad man from heart to heart, aint nothing but! Whar was I born? I was birthed in Dallas, Texas, but I been in N'Awleens since I was five yars old. My ma died when she was eighty-five yars old and my pa died when he was ninety- five yars old. They both died in West, Louisiana...westside of Shreveport...in Grand Case, Louisnana. Sho, they had a nice funeral, their insurances buried them. Was that a big funeral? Was big enough. No, they aint had no band or turnout...it was jest a natchel funeral like all common folks has.
"My pa made cotton..corn and farmed for white folks. He got half of what he farmed and free rent. We used to live in a single house...a farm house. No, it wasn't painted, didn't need it. The inside was bare too. We was living betwixt two big oak trees. Yes, it was pretty, 'specially that little creek that we had on our farm. All the boys used to swim there. Their mothers sho had a time keeping them from swimming. My ma used to beat me every day nigh. My ma and pa raised eleven head of chillun...all of them is dead but me. They died wid natchel diseases. They aint never had no trouble wid us..we wasn't lak other chillun on the farms. My ma used to drum up some kind of seed medicine every year..that stuff made us well all the year through. Shucks, I aint never seen no medicine lak that yet! No, we aint never had no chromic disease..no indeed!
"Besides what? Yes, my ma and pa raised chickens, hogs, cows and two horses..they was used to plow wid. The cows was used to give milk and the chiekens was used to eat. No, my ma and pa aint had no education...aint had a bit, was jest natchel folks. They learned all they knows from the bottom up..could read and write too. They aint been sick a day untill my pa was old. He used to ask me to take care of the farm when he wanted to rest..thats the only time! when he dies I aint counting.
"Pa aint never thought of buying the place, I would be lying if I said he did. No, the white folks aint never said he could buy it either..would be lying if I said that they said it. Yes, ma and pa b'longed to church..pa was a kind of a head deacon in the Friendly Baptist Church. Ma was a member, thats all. Pa was a sport too. He made away wid plenty of money...liked the women plenty. He wasn't no railroad man but he was jest as bad. No, he didn't drink much but he could kill a couple of pints by himself. Pa did his sporting thirty-two miles on this side of Shreveport. There was a good time place there...women! Whew! Went there one day and aint never stopped going.
"What the church thought? The church aint knowed nothing about what pa did...he kept his bisness to himself. No, pa was no gambling man, used to say he couldn't see his money going lak that, he wanted more action than Come Seven for his money! Money for the house? Well, he brought his share. Ma only hepped him, she didn'g have to though.
"Well, I tell you how I got to know sumpin about the farm. There was two of us that was old enough to know sumpin, pa says. There was me and joe, they used to call him barrell head. He was strong as an ox and had a head lak a barrell. Pa told us not to go to school cause we wasn't going to learn nothing no how...we better stay on the farm it. We hepped to plow but I didn't lak that kind of work. No sir, I saw that me and plowing wasn't going to git along..so I ups and tells pa so. He was mad but he saw my pint. He says what you want to be. I says I don't know. He says well you go out and find out and then come back and tell me.
"Pa tried his darnest to make me git married..I was twenty yars. No, I aint had been to school...didn't read or nothing, facts is I can't read till this day. Write? Can't even write my name but I aint no fool, no indeed! Well, to finish telling you. I goes out on the railroad track and I sits down. I looked at the fellows working and I was thinking. I wasn't thinking about the fellows working, I was jest thinking. Ups come the foreman and he says whats you doing boy? I says I'm jest thinking, thats all. He laughs ans says, 'look-a hyar, hyars a boys who is thinking.' Somebody says, 'that damn fool better stop thinking and finds himself a job.' I gits mad and says, 'you finds me a job smart Aleck.' Somebody says what can he do and then somebody starts singing jest lak this..this is jest the way it happens:
"Hyars a fool on the track
Sitting down thinking whars he's at
If the train comes long he's going to be dead
Cause the train is going to cut off his black head? "Then all the fellows started singing and working as they sings. Somebody calls, 'Water boy, whar is that water boy?' He aint coming. They looked at me and says, 'how would you like to be our water boy, sligh pocket?' I says its all right wid me but I got to go tell my pa that I done think. They all laughed and I went tell my pa. He says, 'thats fine..I got a railroad man in my family.' Me, I runs on down to the track and tells the foreman that I'm ready for fork. He looked at me and says that he thinks I can make it. So, I picked up the bucket and there.
"I was a water boy for two yars untill the foreman says, 'boy, you is got bisness making this big money. You aint the size for no water boy. Can't you do this work..can't you tamp these tracks?' I says Yes sir. He puts me on the tracks and I b'comes a traveling railroad man..I was a good one too.
Ambition? Sho, I had ambition. I trys to see how many womens I could git. Not that kind of ambition? Oh, I see! Sho, I wanted to b'come a section boss the white man...and I b'comes one too. Told the white man that I could do his work and he says, 'well, you cheaky black..b...' Say, all you got to do is ask the white folks what you wants, they'll give it to you...they thinks all niggers is crazy, anyhow.
"Man, I went traveling. Thats what I likes about the railroad mans, they goes places. Yes indeed! Women used to follow us everywhar we went..they calls themselves traveling women...or road women. We calls them grafters, thats their names. But, they is good womens. What they do? Them is the women we sing about. Here is what they do's:
Dinah is okay, but there's sumpin I don't lak
I says Dinah does sumpin I don't lak
She's got all kinds of men, white and black "My gal was named Evelina..she was some gal. Everywhar I went she was right there..looking for my money and everybody's money, but she was some gal. My Way wid Evelina? Aint had no way...the mens wid the most money got her time, thats all. Thats the life wid a raliroad man, when his money ran out he was out as far as the women was. But that aint made no mind...I was lak the whistles of the trains..aint never blowed less there was danger..and there was no danger cause I kept my money in my back pocket.
'Kept my money in my back pocket
And my troubles on my sleeves
If a gal wanted to know me
She had to fall on her knees'
"Man, I can see them times now. I used to walk in the barroom and tell everybody to jump naked..aint had no value for money..made it and gave it away. But tell me what I could do wid it now! See, money was easy to make? Every time I left my shack or some gal's shack I knowed I had three fifty made..yes sir. And then I was gambling, playing Coon Can. Man, I was laying it...when I fell a hand there was fifty dollars waiting for me. And you know what fun a man can have wid fifty dollars? Man, the women used to jump naked and acts lak wild animals when I hits the saloon, that was my pleasure. Today? Well, I don't care if they' jump naked or not..don't mean a thing. Thats out for me...I'm jest telling you about old times, see?
"Church? Man, I aint had no time to b'long to no church! Life was lak a bed of roses for me...I mean a bed of roses without any thorns! I went from railroad to railroad..went through Texas and Louisiana lak a wind storm...made women fall on their faces...was the biggest black man that ever hit Shreveport...thats right! I remember walking into a place one evening and telling the man to see how much all the women could drink...he says, 'you got me. 'The bill was forty-four dollars and forty-four cents. I made a woman sit on a hot stove and burn her self for five dollars...I jest wanted her to hollow ouch. I was a rascal!
'Likes to hyar a woman scream
Likes to hyar a woman dreams
Cause when she dreams and screams
She makes her schmes
"Thats what I'm sorry about. I aint stayed on one railroad long ene ough to git no pension..thought I was smart, went from one railroad to another. Went from the S.P. to the T.P. then to the Public Belt.. could git work on all them as soon as I wanted it. Really knowed my work..never let my fun interfere wid it. Made no difference whar I stayed or what I did I aint never missed a day's work or been late in my life...don't b'leive in it. If you going to have a good time do your work...I did mine, could tamp a track lak a hobo rides a train.
"To tell you the truth I didn't know what my folks was doing when I was traveling. No, I aint going to tell no word of lie..I didn't send no money home...aint never thought of it. Stayed away from my folks two yars fore I seed them. Didn't git married but I left some women wid chillun....got one named Pete and one named Josephine. Aint seen 'em in yars...done forgot what they looks lak..they used to be pretty long time ago. No, I aint never been married. Chillun? You ought-a have as many as the Lawd wants you to have..but you can't git some women to have chillun..they won't do it, says it kills 'em down.
Education? Yes indeed. I'm sho sorry I didn't git some..I would be lak you...a fine young man wid a pencil and paper, thats what Education does. It teaches you how to use a pencil and paper lak the white folks. Look at them...they gits education and good jobs. If cullud people will git education they can git good jobs too.
Roosevelt? Man, thats the best man ever been President. Don't let them tell you he aint..if I was a voting man I would vote for him anyday. Sho, I would vote. What party? I would vote for Roosevelt. Makes no difference what party he's in...I would vote for Roosevelt or a man lak him. He's lak Huey P. Long. He done opened plenty people's eyes...he's working for the poor man everyday...them people can say what they wants, but I knows that. No, I aint satisfied b'cause the Welfare aint giving me what I need, but it aint Roosevelt fault. If I was writing man I sho would write him and tell him about it. Would he answer? Didn't he answer that fellow in Mississippi who the white folks was trying to take all of his cotton?
"No, I aint never been sick....been sick and tired of one woman, thats all. Cose, I got lil hart trouble but there aint nothing to it. Could work right now if it wasn't for that. Man, I'm a railroad man...a man who likes to move.
'Josie, Josie whats on yo' mind't 'night?
Been down to the hill and saw a sight
Saw two bugs making love
Had everything in their favor, even the moon above
Josie, Josie, whats on yo' mind t'night?'
"I aint no religious man..I never was...and I don't know when I'll be one. Might be soon...got to git this rialroad stuff out of my head, it might take me strsight to the devil. They tells me there is a heap of 'em down there. I stopped railroading ten yars ago...had some money but it got away from me....got on the E.R.A. seven yars ago and been on it ever since. Better stay on it now. I'm satisfied wid general con- ditions..all I needs is a lil mo' then thirteen dollars per month. Then I might be able to make it. Would I be happy? Whew! Insurance? Aint got none...can't git none. They says I'm a bad risk...dene seen two good risks die and gone. Fun? Don't have none...aint seen a show in thirty-five yars. The last one I saw was a tent show in Shreveport, me and a gal. We was drunk and half saw that one!
"I used to be a Mason and Odd Fellow Too..but I aint nothing now. Yes, they helped me. Got my jobs by being a mason...showed my signs to the section foreman and I was hired. Was made a section foreman in 1916 b'cause I was a mason.
"Speaking about Roosevelt reminds me about Huey P. Long. You know you aint knowed Louisiana had a Senator untill Huey P. Long came along. He had 'em all jumping up there in Washington...Mister President even looked at Huey P. Long.
"Some Of the songs I used to sing? Aint got many now..done forgot most of them. But when we was tamping we used to say:
Hemp! Hemp! Aint long b'fo' dinner time
Hemp! Hemp! Aint long b'fo' dinner time
Goin' buckle up my self to see that gal of mine' "That was one the boys used to sing when the work was hard...when we had to work lak mules lifting up thighs and pulling tracks. We used to sing to make the work easy. When we went barrell-housing we used to sing:
'A railroad travels far and wide
Says he travels far and wide
And he likes to hav his gal by his side.'
"Why most railroad mens drinks a lot? Man, work on the railroad track makes you do everything...you is got to be happy all the time. People 'spects so much from railroad mens. Sho, we will them a good time. Do we ever fight? I don't but they do...you see when fighting time came along I left. Didn't go for trouble, most railroad mens don't care nothing about trouble....aint afraid of nothing. Yes, they carry big knives, pistols and high jackets. Got to carry 'em b'cause you don't know what the other fellow is carrying. Sometimes, he's got a cannon in his back pocket, who knows? Some fellows can't stand for you to win your money...and what you going to do? Can't give it back to them, can you? You got to fight, thats all. Shoot, cut, stab, everything goes.
"Sho, I member coming in contact wid bad women...some was so bad that they'd take yo' money and dare you to say something. A gal named Julia took mine in Baton Rouge..hit me over the head and called the policeman. What could I do? But, I went back to town the next day after I had paid my fine and hit her over the head wid a hammer...she hit the floor. Met a woman Coon Can player in White Castle who had bad cards on her lap..I knowed they was there but I was afraid to say so. She won and won..I got broke. She says, 'got any complaints big boy?' I says no. She says, 'Well keep yo' head up and be on yo' way.' I went on my way too. The next day I hyared that she killed a man b'cause he looked down. Man, bad womens is worse than bad mens..they don't bluff..they shoots to kill and stabs to effect!
"Sho, bad womens flood the towns...they follow railroad mens too. I wouldn't have one if she had a million dollars. They'll steal yo.' life from you when you is sleeping. Hyared a friend of mine sing a song about them kind of womens, aint a trueer song no whar than that song. It went lak this:
'Had a woman who tried to steal mah life
She was sneaky and didn't sleep at night
Would pace the floor till I went to bed
Wishing she could snear off my head
Carried Iodine in a spoon
Talked wid witches and made faces at the moon
Used hoodoo under my nose and my eyes
Used to brag That I wasn't going to tamp no thighs
But I beat her to the trick
Knocked her down wid a big, black stick
My advice is to hold yo'self tight
Never have a woman who threathens to take yo' life.
"Thats a song I always sings. If a woman says she wants to steal my life I pity her...she's going to git her head knocked plum off! Thats sumpin' I aint going to stand for. Will I fight womens? Man, I used' to knock their goozle pipe out...thats the only way to show a woman that you mean bisness. Some womens don't understand no other way.
"Spirits? Sho, I b'leived in 'em. Done seen plenty of 'em. They comes to me lak human beings...jest a-talking, but I don't make no sense out of what they says. I jest let 'em talk. They dissapear when they is finish. Mosquito bar. Son, if you is a man who is scare of spirits git yo'self a mosquito bar. There aint a spirit living who can peep under a mosquito bar. My ma used to tell me that. And I be John Brown if it don't work! How I know? Hyar this man? Asking me how I know? I knows cause I done seen them spirits trying to peep under my mosquito bar....can't make it. I don't mind 'em fooling around my room. Sometimes they mess it up..but thats all right, so long as they don't mess me up.
"Yes, I members what spirits done done. One day a woman talked some smart talk about her dead husband. She was jest a-bragging and a-bragging. A man who was sitting wid her at the table told her, 'woman, you better stop talking so much about that man like that.' She laughed and said, I'm glad he's gone. And jest as she got that out of her mouth a spirit knocked her plum out of a chair to the floor, nearly broke her jaw bone. I bet she aint never said nothing more about her husband. Me, I don't say nothing but kind words about spirits...aint none of 'em going to knock me cold, no sir!
"I likes radio to newspapers. I likes what them talkers says. They sho can talk! The papers is alright but they aint as good as the radio. Diets? I eats everything....I b'leives people oughta eat what they wants. Diets hep kill people, thats all. My heart? Needs relaxing, thats all. Plenty orange juice and plenty rest beats any doctor advice in the world. Charity Hospital doctors jest experimenting wid me, thats all. I don't mind. it...them white folks need all of that to hep make a better world. Its alright wid me. Buddy, I'm sho is glad you come by to see me. I aint seen you since last yar. Come around agin soon, I like to talk about old times. Co'se, a lot of them things you want to talk about I done fo'egot but I'll entertain you. Goodbye."
John Anderson Hill ushered us to his gate where a woman with a pan of food was coming in. We didn't have time to get the connections but we were willing to bet that John did justice to the pan....and maybe to the woman. "A railroad man got devilish ideas in his head until he's plum dead!"
Peter Jackson
2919 Jackson Ave
Interviewed 6/21/39
Submitted 6/30/39
THE VAMPIRE SUGER CANE CUTTER
If you should see a tall, black fellow with small, catlike eyes, cautiously walking along South Rampart Street strumming a guitar, and singing about his women you can bet your last dollar that the man is Peter "Vampiro" Jackson. For SAME strange reason, the Vampire doesn't sing about his troubles which aro many and varied.
The Vampire says he is six feet tall and weighs about one hundred and ninety pounds. He also says he is black, and seems to be very proud of it, stating, "I'm that lastin' color."
"When I was in White Castle I used to be such a vampire around the womens they starts callin' me vampire, says I vamp womens my stuff. Man, I can't play a lick on the guitar but I can sing and strum so damn good. Its a funny thing about White Castle womens, they Sho like music and whiskey," the Vampire said.
Of course, every Vampire has a woman he is crazy about, so, this one is no different. If you listen to him you would think he is without any peer in his line, especially in handling women. "My woman is sane. She knows I can got plenty womens, and when a woman knows that she strictly don't mess around," the Vampire feels.
But, when the Vampire was contacted at his house it was a far different story. Bare facts showed that the Vampire was as tame as a sheep around the house but is a bear-cat away from it.
The Vampire and his paramour live in two rooms in a flat on Jackson Ave neat S. Claiborne. The flat is brown, a dirty brown with bannisters and down. There are approximately eighty-nine persons living in this place and the Vampire is friendly with everyone of them, especially so with the women. "But, let me tell you sumpin'," states the Vampire, "you must never knock around another man's woman under his shade."
The Vampire was born in White Castle. can't remember his ago. "That aint what a man must remember. Its not as important as remembering that you reap what you sew," the Vampire confidentially contended, chuckling like he had something up his sleeves.
"My people is plantation people. We always did live on the Plantation or near it. We been corn pullers and sugar cane cutters all our lives, workin' on the Little Texas Farm. No, I don't know why they calls that place Little Texas but they sho do.
"When I was born my pa and ma was the happiest people in the world. They had done had five girls and sho wanted a boy. Ma prayed fo' one. Pa went to the hoodoo people, they tells. But, he won't let him touch him. Old Pa is a Christian too. Got on his knees and prayed all the time. I used to hear him talkin' to the Lawd at night. I says to myself old Pa must or been a bad sinner cause he sho does pray a lot. Man, I don't know whar pa went but I sho did come hyar a boy. They tells me that pa looked me over and over, and when they told him what I was and he had done seen he went out and got drunk.
"Why pa wanted a boy? Don't you know? Shucks, pa wanted somebody to work fo' him. He was gettin' and older every day. I guess pa was wprryin' about his social security, like they say. My sisters was hangin' around. Two of 'em was married and three of 'em was pullin' corn and helpin' ma around the house. Elviria did Miss Jacobson's clothes. Sho gave all of her seventy-five cents to ma. No, that gal didn't have accent. Ma charged Mer seventy-five cents a week fo' board and lodge.
"There was always some fusin' between ma and sister Emma. She was seventeen yars old and wanted to be a woman. Wanted to go around. Ma didn't want her to be a woman, was careful with her. Emma was a fine looking gal and all them fellows was shottin' at her. Every man in White Castle wanted Emma. She'd start fusin' wid ma all the time, raisin' hell I'd say. Ma used to say, 'Its bad enough with Peter goin' round actin' a fool. You sho aint goin' to come up like no fool. A woman fool is the worse fool of all. Ma was a good woman, didn't stand fo' no funny business. She went to church to serve Gawd. She didn't do like pa. He went there to see how much hell he could raise.
"I remember one time when they wanted to get rid of Reverend White who was at the Plymouth Rock Baptist Church. Well, all the brothers end sisters got together, One side wanted the Rev. and the other side wanted somebody else. Them niggers was fightin' and goin' on sumpin' awful. One woman got up in the center of my floor and called the preacher a dirty rat. Did she raise hell, says he propositioned Martha Wilson out of a whole backyard of chickens, two hogs and hen-house. My pa was the gavel beater. He did his utmost to keep 'em quiet, but he couldn't do it. Them, people was actin' like crazy people. I just laughed myself. No, I wasn't no Christian then. How in the world could I bo a Christian? Me and the Rev. was goin' wid the same woman and I was usin' his flips. We had a gal named Grace Lee. Man, she was a mess As solid as a brick buildin'.
"Things got on pretty bad fo' a while in my house. One woman wanted to fight another woman cause she kept sayin' that Rev. White was a raper. That other lady got up and said if he is a raper why aint you raped? Cause you been goin' wid him long enough. And what did she say that for? Them womens was like crazy people. Pa kept beatin' on the gavel but it aint done no good. Pa got mad and says, 'I don't care what nobody says I aint goin' to take a vote till the whole thing is purely understood. Thats whar they got to arguin' again.
"I went in the back and compose a little song about them niggers. It went like this:
The christians got got round a dinin' room table
To talk about the preacher with the Baptist label
They made up their mind that he was no good
Cause they beleive he stold chickens and wood
Now, I'll tell you sumpin' about a Rev. named White
He sleeps wid a yallar woman every Monday nite
Even got me on the outside lookin' in
Sometimes I feel like crackin' his chin.
"Then, one woman says she regrets that Rev. White must be mixed up with mess like this. Thats whar I sneaks in the back again. You see, I was peopin' at them from the kitchen door. We was livin' in four rooms. You could peep in the dinin' room from the kitchen. Across from the dinin' room was two bed rooms. Emma, Paulina, Agnes. Mildred, and Juanita slept on one of the rooms and my ma and pa, Pauline and Peter, slept in the other room. Ma and pa kept the dinin' room fo' when the church friends came by they had some place to stay. I didn't like that. Couldn't understand it fo' nothin'. till one day pa told me he didn't want anybody sleepin' on the couch in the dinin' room cause it was the only bed in the house that didn't have no chinces on it. That was the only thing wrong about our house. The people who lived there before us put bed bugs in then house and we could never get 'em out. Pa did everything in the world for a man to do to run bed bugs out of a house, even burned the mattress with kerosene. But them rascals came back and as strong as a beet sting'
"Ma used to ask pa to lot us chillin sleep on that cot but he wouldn't do it. 'No indeed,' he used to say, 'I'm goin' to have sumpin' fo' my friends to sleep on.
"Anyhow, the arguin' went on and on. My pa got mad and said he would fix everything. Everybody wanted to know what he was goin' to do but pa wouldn't say. Somebody asked to make a motion and pa got up and hit him right smack in the mouth. Then, there was a free-for-all. Everybody started mixin' it up. Man, some of them people went in our kitchen and got pots and pans, dishes, Rchairs, spoons, knives and forks. They was throwin' things around and fightin' sumpin' awful, broke up the house. The sheriff came and put everybody in jail. They stayed in jail too. Some white folks my pa knowed tried to get him out but the judge said he wasn't goin' to let 'em out till that religious thing over with. His cook was all mixed up in that thing. She had missed plenty work and told the judge that Rev. White was takin' the people's money and wasn't no good. He said his cook had been complainin' about Rev. White fo' the longest. Well, I was sorry pa was in jail but everybody was askin' me why didn't I make a song out of the whole mess so I gets my Self together and I makes up this song:
It aint my business to fool wid no preacher man
His business if preaching the book
And mine is messin' wid sugar cane
But sumpin' tells me he's got the members hooked.
Sometimes I figure its best to be dead
Than to beleive anything the Rev. done said.
They might tell you 'bout Moses and Pharoah
And when you gohe come knockin' on yo' door.
Preachers is like the dark of the night
You can't see 'em when they is messin' wid yo' wife.
Take this man Rev. White, he's no good
Been tryin' to mess wid every woman in his neighborhood
He likes the gal I like and wants to do the things I do
How can a man like that speak the real truth?
So, when all the sisters came to my house
I felt like tellin' em don't stick out yo' mouth
Cause you know the Rev what its all about!
I did my peepin' from the keyhole crack
Looked up one of them sisters back.
Sho aint had no spino, nothin' to brace her troubles
Ought to be diggin' with some kind of shovel.
What did they do? The fought and fussed
Tryin' to act like the rest of us. We aint no holy people or nothin' like that
But we don't go runnin' round the church like rats
And then get out and talk about the church
The thing we say we give our last shirt.
Thats why my pa hit the man on the jaw
Cause what ho was tryin' to do my had dono saw.
Now, all of nam is jail waitin' for the judge
To get 'em together in some kind of a morgo.
"I was at the trial. Man, it sho was crowded. One of them white folks was standin' around to keep them church people from makin' lots of noise. The clerk said, order in the court. The judge is hyar' Man, was them Christian people scared. They was troubling' All of 'em was sittin' up infront. They was only in jail two days, and hadn't had nothin' to cat cause the man said the jail aint had no money to feed all them niggers. One woman was so scared she kopt askin' to be excused. The clerk got mad and told her no. But the judge hyared about it and told him to let her out, cause he says, 'this is a court room. I don't nothin' else to take place hyar but this trial.'
"The furst one they calls up was Reverend White. No, he hadn't done been in jail. Old Rev. went b'fore the judge wid his Bible in his hand. He though he was pullin' on a fast one but tho judge told him to put the Bible down 'You aint been usin' it all this time so don't come up wid it now brother.' Man. thats whar you could or bought Rev. fo' a penny. That nigger is as black as cold and turned green. I guess he was too scared to turn white.
"The judge....think his name was Judge Paul...says, now Rev. I don't know much about you and I don't want to know much about you. All I wants to know is whats wrong at yo' church? People come hyer fusin' at the mouth, in jail and in the peneitentiary all over yo' church.'
"Thats whar old Rev. up and says, 'Well, yo' honor, I'm a Gawd sent man.' But the judge stopped that lie right away. He says, 'I don't know what you is but you need to be a Gawd man now, cause I'n goin' to run you out of town'.' Is you goin' to do that yo' 'honor?' says old Rev., tremblin' in his booths. As soona as the judge finished talkin' one of the sisters says, 'halleujah!' The clerk says, 'halleujah hell.' Thats whar everybody laughed, and the judge fine the court fifty cents a piece.
"Thats the truth, so help me. I done told that to many people but they don't beleive me. It was all in fun, and then Judge Paul wanted to do them people some good. If he hadn't stopped them there was goin' to be some hell in the church. I mean more hell. Them mens was against the Rev. and the womens was wid him. And you know a man will crack his old lady's skull if ho knows She is messin' around wid a preacher.
"Their trail was all over with that. judge told them darkies if 'they git another preacher and mess up and keep his cook from comin' to work he was goin' to send all of 'em to penetentiary.
"So, what do you think they did? They all got together and elected my pa preacher. And pa couldn't preach a lick in the world. I used to hyar him all the time on his kneses askin' the Lawd to give him the grace. I always did say that he ought im er had the grace. I don't know if the Lawd over gave my pa grace or not but he kept the church. I do know that he didn't mess around wid no womens cause my ma was right on his time. Then too, pa was safe. He couldn't move around or nothin' like that.
"Even though Pa was a preacher I didn't bother about church much them. I had my mind on womens. Had nine of them.
"This is how I picked up playin' the guitar: I made up a song once that went like this;
Love is a thing made like a lizzard
It flaps round your hart and tickles yo' gizzard.
Love blossoms liks sweet odors in the spring
It puts hairs on yo' chest and everything.
"I spent all my time singin' that song cause everybody liked it. A friend of mine had a guitar. He used to strum it all along the street. Harry was always sayin' he could strum all right but he couldn't sing. He was always tryin' to sing like me. So, one day I told him if he showed me how to strum a little I would give him some of my songs. No, I never did write 'em down, just sang 'em. composed 'em I reckon. "Here's one I calls SMART AND PLENTY SHARP.
You played hookey and didn't go to school,
Went to the hospital and acted like a fool.
I gave you money, gowns, and shoes,
And black gal, you have me the low down blues.
You is very smart mama, yo' trick is fine.
But I'll get you mama when yo' troubles is lak mine.
You done always played me for a shump,
When you let me fall I hit my bump:
Mister Taker, you think you is smart,
But, I'm goin' to tell you fore you start
That you aint got nothin' but an empty cart:
"My life is a song. I aint had no schoolin'. Yes indeed. My songs used to help me when I was outtin' cane. Man, I likes to out cane. Aint nothin' to it when you knows how, its jest lak anything else. If there was a little bit more money in it I'd be right back on the cane fields now. I was up there two yars ago when the government made everybody get off the W.P.A. and go up and cut cane.
"My people aint never of education I don'r reckon. We was all workin' people. No, we aint had no trouble with no white folks or nothin like that. The biggest year we ever had was the furst yoar pa was a preacher and everything wont good. We cleaned up, made about five hundred dollars that year.
"Hero's another song I composed:
Well, this was the furst of my knowledge three yars ago
When I was workin' on the press at Tally-Ho
I told Mr. Moss I was goin' to make a block
At this time it was about seven o'clock
So, I tipped around my house:
He was peepin' through a crack.
That was sumpin' I sho didn't lak.
I was tremblin, excited, and very cold,
I was thinking about my jolly roll.
The last time I hyared about her she had jumped a fence
Thats whar the story commences.
I was thinkin' how I bought my gal beautiful gowns
And when I got home her face was full of frowns.
I got mad and told her to go, I mean go
Cause I didn't want that black gal no mo'.
I got me a pretty mama from acrods the field
Her name was pretty, they called Cecile.
"People in the comntry used to lak me sing that song. Now I'm goin' to give you a big part of my history in a song I composed.
When you meet a woman don't be too fast
Everything he or She says, don't say "yes."
Be sincere and be sure you got the right one,
If you Don't be careful you'll be stung.
Some of us is a little too hasty through life.
We become complicated in pickin' yo' wife.
She may lock pretty, or she may look fine.
But she may cause you to lose yo' mind.
And if you don't get some self-controll She'll make you lose yo' soul.
You can't be too particular, and you can never tell
Cause one of them womens will send you straight to Hell.
I am very proud, I didn't get the dispondent
You know, I am a fisherman and might or got drown
Listen young people who seem to be in a baloon
Don't pick yo' wife too soon.
And old people jest lak myself, lots hang our goods on our shelf.
You know ehen we get old we try to bo young.
And the first thing you know you is stung.
All these words is about me poor little me.
Women done had me down, right on my knees.
I know Gawd went to Adams and gave him the laws
Here comes Eve with the Apple acting like Santa Claus.
Adam took a piece and it tasted all right,
And Eve had Adam flying just like a kite.
And there you go, no again
Right out hyar in the rain.
"I was born on the plantation I tell you. Couldn't be nothin' else but a cane cutter when I was almost born cuttin' it. Juest like I told you my pa had me hittin' it when I was big enough to think about work.
"I'll tell you how cane cuttin' go. It takes four mens to carry a set of rows.
The leader is the best and the fattest. He gets One dollar and sixty cents a day, the other people get one dollar and fifty cents. The leader keeps check on the other cans cutters. There aint got no special distance to go.
"A set of rows consist of two heap rows and two fky rows. There is a row in the middle for the derrick to go on. Two mens work an each side of the heap row to pile the cane for the derrick to pick it up. The derrick passes two fly rows. Yes, there is a foreman. His job is to see that they aint cuttin' the cane too high or too low.
"You is suppose to hold the cane with yo' left hand and then strip it of all the shucks, all the way down. The bottom of the cane is the sweetest part. Thats the part that is left to grow.
"The derrick puts it in the wagon where it is taken to be weighted.
"The season fo' cane is from October First to January. Women put long stockings on their arms to keep the cane from cuttin' <text not clear> 'em. All cane cutters work from six in the mornin' until six in the night. It aint hard work. not once you is used to it. Man, I done made a lot of money cuttin' cane, used to make enough to buy them shoe pick shoes. And I was studded down to a soft beat. Mellow man. Sharp as a tack. Had plenty gals. I used to beat the nails with my stuff. Man, one fifty was plenty fo' me, and then I had a dime or so over. I aint had to never buy a drink. The womens who wanted me to sing bought that.
"Never seen nothin' lak it in my life. After I finished work I'd have to go by some. Woman's house and lay up and play and sing fo' her. Womens sho lak that. They calls it muggins up a breeze. We mugged too.
"How you plant cane? You get two stubs and turn top and butt together and put int the ground. You cut it in September for the plant. In April you now it down and work it. I mean scrape it. Don't worry about water. The rain will take care of that.
"Say, when you out cane you is suppose to sing. One of my best songs was called, Shuokin' the Cane.
Hit the bucket with a little water
Cause I shuckin' on dam fo' my quarter
I figures its a quarter fo' my time
Fifty fo' my ma. and the rest fo' my shine
Let me shucks the cane on down
So I can get my flips and go to town
I'm shuckin' the cane, shuckin'
After a while I'll' be fuuckin'.
"I worked as a xane cutter fo' nineteen yars. Left it to come hyar, but I used to go back every summer. I'm workin' on the W.?P.A. now. I been on the W.P.A. ever since it started and before. I couldn't get nothin' else#. Every Summer my committe told me to go out cane. When I come back my job was waitin' fo' me.
"No, I don't reckon I'm much of a Christian now. Religion and me never was much good, I guess its because I had done had too many preachers wives. Oh yes, I take them kind. They is always easy, cause the preacher spends his time knockin' round somebody's else's old lady and leaves his undone. So, I steps in and do 'em, do 'em up I mean.
"I came to N'Awleens about fifteen yars ago. I'm about fifty-two. Me and my old lady aint married, but when I gets religion I'm goin' to marry her, cause she says she is tired livin' a common life, and I don't blame her. I'm her fourth old man, but she is still good. A woman lak her will make you hang around the house.
"My wife is workin'. We do all right. I'm thinkin' about goin' to pick cane right now. I says my money when I pick cane. In the country whar people like all kind of craziness I don't have to buy a lot of things. Hyar the people gets so much they aint got time to stop and really liesten about much. All these people down hyar wanst to do is drink. You can't stop 'em from drinkin'. sho can't!
"I finds the womens in New Awleens aint lak womens in the country. They don't lak to sit up lak them country womens. I done seen times when country womens sit up all nite to hyar a little musie, but not these womens.
"Live hyar with my old lady. We aint got much. Just two tables, a stove, a bed and a few clothes. We do allrigt. Can't spect to get rick, you know. My little and my old lady's little makes it go. I get thirty-eight fifty and she gets six fifty a week. We makes it on that. Things has done been tuff but they is clearin' out allright now. Thanks to Roosevelt. No indeed, no chillun fo' me, too much trouble and the depression is still on.
"Religion is allright. I aint got it yet, thats all. I thinks people ought to be religious. Its bound to get you somewhar. As soon as I need it I'll ask the Lawd fo' it. I guess when he gives it to me I'm goin' to get a lot. Thate what my pa did. Sho, he and ma is still in White Castle. Got his church too. Pa asked me not to stay at home cause I disgrace him, cause I went get religion. One time I told I'm goin' to pray fo' it. He laughed, membering he did the same thing. Now, he's got plenty religion cause he can't run after them skirts. But, I can run after them."
Emile Ward
4610 Chestnut St.
Interviewed 7/12/39
Submitted 7/17/39
Life History
THE LIFE HISTORY OF A SUGAR CANE WORKER
It is very plain that a working man must have some fun. And it is probable thata black working man will have a "high yallar" gal, the kind who packs tender thighs. Cane cutters are no different, they are working men too. Because "any man who meets the mornin' and then the evenin' in the same place is a workin' man."
Emile Ward was one of the best cane cutters in Lecompte Parish. His only trouble was that he played too much. Emile would work all day and forget to stop playing at night, which caused him to become too tired to work the next day. "My boss was an old man and couldn't see things like I did, so he always dockin' me," states Emile, who is against any boss who threathens to tame him, or keep him from having fun. Emile is a six footer, weighs about two hundred and ten pounds. He is a smooth black with crystal-like teeth which makes a very pretty picture 'when he opens his thick lips and big mouth. Emile laughs heartily, his belly rolling like jelly. He is a plain dresser, wearing overalls most of the time.
For some Strange reason Emile will not get married. However, he is the father of four boys by four different women. "Yeah, I got liberty with my love," he smiles, disregarding all the decent principles of life. The general spirit which permeates Emile's desire to be the father of children by different women grew out of admiration of his father whom he didn't know until he was sixteen. He is forty-seven now. "I used to see my pa man-handle women all the time. I used to wonder who he was, and one day my ma said he was my pa. I went up and told him what my ma says and he says, 'thats right son.' Then me and my pa commence gettin' t' gether," Emile proudly states.
"I was born on the plantation in Lecompte forty-seven years ago," Emile says, pressing his mind to recall his early child-hood days. I aint had no pappy. Ma was workin' on the farm. Every now and then I used to see some mens come around to see ma but I aint never thought nothin' of it. We was po' people. The folks in the big house used to like ma, she'd do their washin' and ironin' sometimes. I was a small boy buy I remembers how ma used to work. After she'd leave the farm she'd come home and wash nearly all nite. Thats one thing about her, she sho b'leive in bein' clean. Ma used to say all the time, 'you can be po' but you sho don't have to be dirty.'
"Aint never been to school, ceptin' the time some lady come around two times in two years and teached me my A.B. C. lessons. She used to say it was a shame I couldn't go to school cause I was smart. I was that, allright. Man, I could figure and everything. Learned it at the store, just watchin'. I used to keep my eyes open. No, there was no schoolin' fo' me. Cause ma used to say all the time that as soon as I gets big enough I had to take that load off'n her. I was small but I'd ten to the small farm we had. Ma was teachin' me how to cut cane. They was payin' one and a half fo' that.
"We was doin'z all right. The only trouble was that ma used to say all the time that the grocery bill and the rent took up all her money. We could never buy no clothes and do things fo' ourselves cause we aint had the money. Ma got terribly sick one time. Thats the time we caught hell, particular hell. Them people on the farm raised enough for the doctor's furst call, and we had to owe him the rest. We still owe him. The doctor said, "you po' niggers ought to go down to N'Awleens. Thats when I got in my mind to go to N'Awleens. I always did say that I was goin' to work and save me some money andthen go to N'Awleens.
"Ma took up wid a man who wasn't much good. Everybody told her that he wasn't much good. His name was Tom. What was ma's name? Emma, Emma Ward. Ward was her maiden name. I was named after her. Emile. No, I aint never been christained. Ma just had me. As far as I know. This might sound like a lie, but ma told me she just had me like on today and she put me up and let me cry all day and she went out and cut cane. You see, ma had to have me. She got hitched. She aint cared fo' me much in the beginnin', didn't care if I lived or died. But I lived and ma starts to love me. She used to sit up and cry over me plenty. When I got big I asked her one day why did she cry over me and ma said that she almost threw me away cause I was in her way.
"You see, I'll tell you how ma made up wid my pa. She was raised byx some white folks in St. John Parish. They raised her from a child. Her ma and pa used to work fo' them white folks fo' years but they die. So, they took my ma in and begin to raise her. Well, them white folks was so mean they forces my ma to run away. She runs to Lecompte. She could always cut cane, so she gets a job. Well, you know there is always some smart nigger around. Well, Tom was that smart nigger. He aint done nothin' but hang around and take money from the womens. The high sherriff ran him out of town twice but he knowed some good white folks and they let him back. But, the bastard was no good.
"My ma was a pretty black gal. Tom was a brownskin. Well, he commence wooin' my ma. He used to come over to the house all the time, bring cane and sit down and talk fo' the longest my ma says. She was young, he was a way older than her. She aint knowed nothin' bout keepin' men off her. Thats whar I knows I was a forced baby, cause ma aint knowed nothin'. It shows you she aint knowed nothin', cause when she got like that she aint told nobody. And when she gets puffed way out there the people start sayin', "Child, Emma's gettin' a baby.' The Reverend come runnin' over to my ma's house like somebody crazy. I had done been born I'd sho knocked him on his ass. Stead of him tryin' to hep my ma he come sayin' let me make the next one. My ma spitted right in his face. She did him right, didn't she? Black bastard! You see, everybody thought my ma was a bad woman. I don't know why they thought that. Tom was makin' babies fo' everybody in the church and everywhar else.
"Ma said she had a hard time. No, she didn't b'long to church. Cause she always did say if she ever went to that church she was goin' to tell the congregation what the preacher told her, and the preacher used to send her word not to come. You see, my ma was pig meat. And all preachers like pig meat!
"The only friend I knows of that my ma had was an old lady we used to call Antie. When she wasn't sick she used to come over and hep ma, but she was always sick, po' thing. When Antie died we all went to the funeral. That was my furst time in a church in LeCompte. I sho did feel funny. Yeah, ma went to the funeral too. No, she aint said nothin' bout the preacher. But, I'm tellin' you that bastard sho did feel funny. Every time he'd look at ma he'd mess up his text. I don't know why he felt like that, cause that was a long time afterwards. Shucks, ma thought she was foolin' me. She didn't a want me to know that was the preacher who had tried her. I was nothin! but a lil boy but ma knowed I'd knock that preacher on his ass right there in the church. Funeral or no funeral. I start to knock my pa on his ass, but ma stopped me. Say, man I'd do anything in the world fo' my ma. Thats why I didn't leave Lecompte b'fore I did.
"I'll tell you why I didn't like the church. Them people was hollorin' and carryin' on like fools. I don't like all that noise. And I couldn't see why they was makin' so much fuss, cause when you is dead you is dead. When I die I don't want 'em to do nothin' but put my body in a box and put me under the groud. I don't want no preacher standin' over me wid no Bible in his hand and a lot of damn crazy talk. Let me rest in peace. I aint goin' to never go to another funeral like Antie's funeral in my life. I don't mind goin' to a funeral but I sho don't like none of this you say sumpin' then I say sumpin', and then he says sumpin'. Bury the people. Some sister come sayin' to my ma, 'aint you got nothin' to say over Antie?' My ma says, 'no mam.' Then somebody come sayin, 'Umph. What can she say?' And boy, that whar I almost broke up the church. I says, if she'd talk all you damn hipocrites would run out er this church like fire was on yo' asses. Did I say that? You should er been there. Sho, I said it! I didn't give a damn!
"I was gettin' big then. What about school? Man, school is fo' rich kids I was too po' to even think about it. The furst thing I thought about was gettin' in that cane field and savin' enough money to get me and my ma down to N'Awleens. Thats what I wanted to do. I had done figured that I'd come down hyar and get me a good job and put my ma up in a house. But as soon as I got to workin' and doin' all right the high sherriff comes to my house and tells me and my ma that I had to marry Susie Brown or give give him twenty-five dollars. She had my baby all right, but I didn't marry her. I don't know what the high sherriff told her, but I reckon he told her that I didn't have to marry her. Anyway, he took all my money, aint had none. Had to start savin' all over again. And as soon as I got a little bit more ma took sick wid the consumption. She got wet in the cane field and caught a bad cold. She got to couffin' and carryin' on. The doctor came back but he said I'd have to pay him infront. I paid him a little and owed him the rest. Yeah, I still owe him. Then he says, 'the best thing fo' you to do is take yo' mother to N'Awleens.' But, before I could take my ma to N'Awleens she died. I was goin' to bury her in the back yard but somebody told the high sherriff. He came home and stopped me. He was a fine fellow. Told me if I wanted to bring my ma to church to go head and do so. Ma aint never said nothin' bout bringin' her to no church, and you know how I felt bout it. But, the high sherriff wanted me to go head and bring her to church. I told him I aint had no money to take her to church and I aint had no money to bury. The doctor took it all. He aint said nothin' to me but went right on. He says, 'don't you worry.' Lawd today, that man was some white man. Thats what I calls a white man. Do you know what he did? He went straight to the foreman and got money to fix ma up, then he went to the preacher. I don't know what he told the preacher but I know what he told me. The high sherriff says to me jest like this: 'I got enough on all these bastards to run 'em all in jail.' Man, the preacher and half of the church came to my house and took it away from me. They sho was nice. Everything was well taken care of. They gave my ma a nice funeral. And did that preache preach! He went to town. Them sisters got up and told some of the damnest lies I ever did hear tell. All of them was sayin' what my ma told 'em, what they knowed about my ma, and all that. Aint a one of' em knowed my ma.
"After the funeral a gal named Althea came to my house and ask me could she take care of things fo' me. I let her come in and we got t'gether. She had a baby fo' me, and I left town. But I came back. Why I left? Man, I aint had no twenty-five dollars to give that high sherriff!
"Thats when I met my pa. He commence showin' me around. I quite the cane field and starts to havin' my fun. I got hitched wid my furst yallar woman. I was doin' allright till she tells me I had to work, 'didn't I know that all black mens had to work fo' yallar womens,' I says, Oh yeah, Then I beats her ass. Thats when I had to leave town fo' true, cause she was the high sherriff's woman!
"I comes on down to N'Awleens. Somebody tells me that the high sherriff put the policemens on me because I killed a man. I was down hyar two years, and do you know that the policemens caught me and beat me up. They say I killed a white man in Lecompte. They sends me back to Lecompte. The only thing saves me was that the high sherriff had done died. Them other sheriffs tried their damnest to find out who was the man I killed but they couldnt. Man, I stayed in jail three months. Aint had nothin' but dry bread and water once a day. They talked about lynchin' me and everything. One of them sherriff used to come in the jail everyday and slapped me in the face. He say he was goin to make me say I killed a white man. I'd said it but I didn't know no name of any white man who was dead. No, there wasn't no trial. I aint never seen a judge. Somebody said the judge was on a vacation. I don't know whar he' was. I know I aint never seen him. "Man, stayin' in jail was allright but sleepin' wid them rats, roaches and bed bugs almost drove me crazy. I aint never in all my life seen so many bed bugs. Everywhar I'd move one of them rascals was bitin' me. I was so bit up by bed bugs I made up a little song:
Mister bed bug, is you goin' let me sleep tonight
Mister bed bug, is you goin' let me sleep tonight
The only thing I got to offer you is that shinin' moonlight.
I aint had no sleep since I been in this mess Says, I aint had no sleep since this lodown mess.
I aint done nothin', and I'm charge wid false arrest.
Mister bed bug, plase don't bite me no mo'
Mister bed bug, please don't bite me no mo'
Cause I'm goin' get off'n this bed and sleep on the flo'.
This is my furst time in jail and I don't what to do
My furst time in jail. I don't know what to do
I'm goin' get me some t'bacco and sprinkle you.
Mister bed bug, please leave me alone
Mister bed bug, will you please leave me alone
I'm goin' stop my cryin' and stop singin' this song.
"One of them sherriffs heard me singin' one day and says, 'how you can be happy and we is thinkin' bout cuttin' off yo' damn neck is sumpin' I a can't understand.' Then he went away. Man, I had done give up my life. That old preacher came down to the jail and wanted to pray wid me. I says, 'you damn fool. Get out hyar and find Geraldine. Tell her I'm sorry, and if I ever git out of jail I'm goin' take her to N'Awleens and let her be my wife the rest of my days.' That old preacher got out of that jail. He knowed I wasn't to be fooled wid. He knowed I'd start sumpin' right there in the jail, and there it would be fo' him and me!
"Man, I don't know what happened, but some white man came to the jail and told them sherriffs this like this, I aint tellin' you no word of lie. I swear! He says, 'doesn't you' all know you got to feed this nigger even If you feed him water and bread? And if you kill him its goin' to cost us money This niggeraint never killed no white man. And if we kill this nigger foul we islosin' money foul.' Man, them sherriffs aint done nothin' but turned me aloose. When I got out of jail I went to that gal and thanked her. She thought I was comin' back but I fooled her. I came on back to N'Awleens and got settled again.
"Let me tell you I wasscared of yallar womens fo' a long time. But I got allright again. Yallar womens done had three kids fo' me. Only the Lawd knows where they is, I sho don't. I guess one day one of 'em will come and say, Pa this is yo' son.
"My trouble is that I jest can't stay wid no one woman no time, jest can't. I trys but I jest can't. I aint done no cane cuttin' since I been in Lecompte. I started to go back one summer but I knew I was goin' to get introuble wid them yallar womens. Why the trouble? Well, you see, them yallar womens got white mens, and no white mens want you to mess around their womens, no matter what color they is.
"There aint but one thing fo' the cullud people to do and that is to work and save their money and go into business. If I had knowed what I know now I'd be right smack into business. What kind of business? I don't know, but some kind of business. Our trouble is my trouble, or anyway you look at it. We like to have too much fun. What I call fun? I calls fun havin' plenty womens. Look at me. I have so many I can't walk along the street. About nine of 'em done swore that they is goin' to kill me. I'll tell you why. I aint had no work so I took their money when they went out at night. Could you blame me? I had to eat. I had to have clothes. I had to live. Didn't I. I still got to live!
"I'm on the W.P.A. They say they is goin' to take me off. If they take me off I guess I'll go back to the country, but not to Lecompte. No indeed! Them sherriffs is too bad, specially when you likes yallar womens. And man. I aint goin' to lie. I like 'em.
"You see how I live. I live right hyar in this one room and I aint got nothin' in it but a wash stand and a bed. Thats all I needs. I'm goin' to eat, cause I pay an old lady around the corner two fifty per week. Thats fo' food. I sleep hyar or at somebody else's house. I brings my womens hyar when I wants to, and I have my fun hyar when I wants to. this is my life cause I have my fun. I aint got no what some people calls future. It will bring on it self. No matter what you do yo' future is goin' to be what its suppose to be, anyway.
"Man, I aint never been sick in my life. Aint had nothin', not even a fever. I don't even 'spect to be sick. I drink too mcu liquor to get sick. Man, whiskey will ease anything. Yo' trouble and everything,
"How I feels about children? I feels that people should have as many kids as they can take care of and no mo'. Thats one of the things wrong wid cullud people. They have too many children. Man, if I ever get married I aint goin' to never have a gang of chillun. My wife better try to find sumpin' to do to keep from havin' a gang of chullun. Most womens let kids slip up on 'em, but it aint goin' to happen to me, no indeed!
"Didn't I have chillun? Sho, but they aint really fo' me. Man, how in the world can a woman tell who is the pa if their kid? How can they?"