Approximately 5,850 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: LIVING ON THE RICHARDS' FARM
Date of First "Writing	February 7, 1959
Name of Person Interviewed	Carrie B.R. Dunlap (white)
Fictitious Name	Caroline B. Richards
Street Address	Four miles south of Winnsboro S. C., on Winnsboro and Co- lumbia Highway
Place	Rockton, S. C.
Occupation	Farner (small truck) chickens eggs, etc for sale
Name of Writer	Lucile Clarke Ford
Name of Reviser	State Office
Just outside the gate of the Richards' home is a bush of "breath of spring" in full bloom. A hedge of the same plant extends along the front of the wired-in plot called the front yard, which is a garden for all kinds of flowers. The walk, diagonal across the yard from the gate to front steps, is bordered inside with rooks and on the outside with a line of bulbs, including "butter and eggs", Jonquils, daffodils, and narcissi. Further out in the yard is a carpet of violets in bloom.
Such were the evidences of Carolina Richards' lore of beauty. And with the artistic setting her skill and energy had created about her home, she was little affected by the gloom of a cloudy, threatening February day.
The front door was looked. This meant that Caroline was probably In the back of the small white cottage, grayed with weathering, and busy with the duties of asking a home for her family, duties that usually filled her day. A trip down the side of the yard and a knock on the window pane brought Caroline to the window, smiling. "Come on in the back. I'm just finishing up the dinner dishes."
We walked through a back porch into the back hall and entered the bedroom. "Have a seat here," said Caroline. "I'll light the fire. I always let it go down when I'm busy in the back. I'm afraid of fire, and I save on the wood. Dan and the boys keep so busy with farm work, and the general up-keep of the place, there's no time to keep stacks of wood in the wood pile."
While Caroline got the box of dry pine and fat lightwood, so plentiful in the woods of the Richards' farm, to kindle a fire, I sat in a small, oak rocking chair before the fireplace, which was cater-cornered in the west and of the room. The smooth cemented facing and hearth was clean, and wrought-iron tongs and andirons were in their place, with a pewter pitcher convenient for warm water at all times. The neat, hand-made, oak-stained mantel is the hand work of Mr. Richards, who, with Bill, the eldest son, did most of the carpenter's work on the farm. Above the mantel hung a framed copy of "A Morning Prayer." A green crockery pot, with wandering jew gracefully falling over the edge of the mantel, sat just under the morning prayer. At one end of the mantel hung a picture of a colorful mountain scene. At the other end of the mantel, a well-polished mirror added cheer to the pine-ceiled, unpainted room, with clean white pine floors. Bright rag rugs, the hand work of Caroline and her daughters, were well placed in front of fireplace, beds, and dressers. The pine logs, with chips thrown on, soon crackled and gave the necessary warmth for a semi-warn afternoon In February.
"Now, if you'll excuse me, I'll change my dress before I sit down. I always rest and enjoy myself more when I can get out of my work clothes. And since Dr. Buckner makes me rest every afternoon, I might as well tidy-up and get all the fun I can out of being lazy. Dr. Buckner says I'm just run-down from overwork and need to eat a lot and rest in daytime as well as nighttime."
With quick, alert movements, Caroline changed into a neat, new, soft shade of blue cotton print, with heavy tatting around the roll collar which she continued to fasten as she went to the dresser to brush up the straying looks of gray hair which were already pinned in a braid coiled on the back of her head. Her erect shoulders and agile step showed no deep soars as a result of childhood hardships forced by the War Between the States, causing Caroline to grow up in poverty and to marry, while still young, a man seventeen years her senior. She has given birth to eight children, seven of which are living.
As she seated herself on the opposite side of the fireplace in a rocking chair, she said! "Last night I was reading my mother's old Bible. When I re-read the family record as Mother wrote it, I was reminded of the visits Aunt Lula made to us and how She and Mother would talk about old times. Yes, Mother had three sisters and four brothers. Aunt Lula died young with consumption. There wasn't any cure for it back in those days. Just as with my brother James, who was crippled. He couldn't get out and play the games the rest of us played. James, we called him Jim for short, was crippled when he was ten years old. He fell off of old Charlie, the horse. He always rode Charlie for the call once or twice a week. Oh, I remember how tired Jim would get sitting by the window and watching us play town-ball and baseball, we needed him to fill out the games, as it took the girls and boys both to make up a game. Jim worried Ma ft lot of the time, wanting something to road. She used to say, 'Why, you have your Bible and Pilgrim's Progress, that's plenty for you to read.' We had the Hews and Herald, Godey's Lady Book, and the Home and Farm paper. The Home and Farm paper same from Louisville, Kentucky. It had ft section for men and one for women. The women's section had cooking receipts, styles, and stories in it. We all were awfully excited the day the magazines would come. Ma had to divide them out to keep us from fighting and getting in a disagreement about them. Bloom's Almanac was good to read, too. Jim knew all about the weather and signs in that. The neighbors lent him what books they had. Ma taught all of us, when it was so we couldn't go to school.
"The roads were so muddy and the weather so cold, it was hard to get to school. No didn't have school but four months in the year. The schoolhouse was Just an old office that Dr. Hill had used. There was a long home-made table down the middle of the room, with high benches at the sides and at each end. My feet used to go to sleep when I sat there with my legs handing off, and in my home-made stockings. Ma always knit all summer long, and Aunt Lula, helped her knit socks and stockings for all our crowd. I wore heavy leather shoes, with brass toes, and shoes were good "hand-me-downs" when they hadn't worn out.
"I had to wear Sister Lizzie's old shoes, and clothes, too, sometime. That old office of Dr. Hill's had shelves all on one wall he used to keep medicines in, but we could use them for books and our dinner buckets."
"What did we carry to school to eat? Why, we had plenty of hogs so we had sausage or sparerib or backbone and some kind of bread, cither corn bread or biscuits, and baked sweet potatoes. Sometimes we just carried fried pies. Ma always dried up peaches and apples-through the summer.
"We had to start soon in the morning. It was about three miles from our house to the schoolhouse, and those old red clay hills froze up and were so muddy and cold. The sun would rise while we were on the way. It was nearly dark when we got home at night. But we would have a good time playing on the way home We had to bring in wood, chips, kindling, and the water from the spring, in the evenings when we got home. The spring was down a big hill.
"Yes, ma'am, my ma end all of her sisters had a said to wait on them. Her brothers had a Negro man, too. But they didn't have anything after the war but a lot of land, and taxes was high on that. I can't tell you nothing about the war only just what Ma told us. Pa was severely wounded. Two of Pa's brothers was killed in the seven days around Richmond. Uncle Abram and Uncle Jerry was fighting side by side. When Uncle Abram was shot down, Uncle Jerry bent down to lift him up, and he was shot right through the back. my pa was sent out foraging for rations to feed the men in the Confederate Army. He had to go to all the homes he could get to. Mrs. Woodruff, old Major Woodruff's mother, gave and gave, 'til, finally, my pa said she was about out of rations herself, and she gave him a whole peck of dried cowpeas.
"After the war, was they ashamed they had to work?" "Lewd, no'm! My ma said they saw so much trouble they got used to anything. Work wan't nothing! They learned to do the things they had been having Negroes to do. My father was a wheelwright.
"He didn't have time to tend much land. Yes'm, he had plenty of land, but no hands to work on it. He could do the blacksmith work without so many hands. Old Uncle Cab Watkins, he was black and greasy looking, but he could do all sorts of work. He helped Pa to run the shop, and they could make buggies, wagons, plowstocks and every kind of farm tools. Uncle Cab out out and smoothed the wood and did the iron work. What kind of iron? They just had to pick up scraps of old worn-out things wherever they could find it and make it over In the shop. Pa, he did painting and upholstering and fixing cushions. They used old hair from trimming up horses. Sometimes they had to use sheep's wool or cotton to stuff the cushions with. They made wire tasks themselves. My pa was real proud of all he could do, and he turned out good jobs. Some of my boys can work just like Pa did. I'm going to show you what Bill has just finished for me."
We went through the front hall into the front roan kept for a sitting room when company came. Caroline said, "Look at this!" It was a small, octagon-shaped, walnut table, with four round-shaped legs grooved with small circles near the top of the table. It was highly polished and a rich walnut color. A far-away look came over her face as she added, "Bill can do anything. He worked his way on through schools, 'til now he's called doctor. He went off to the University of Iowa and got a degree. It's in science and chemistry. He worked up there in the Aluminum works of America. He got big pay and sent home some to help Maggie and Jane. Then he married while he was up there. This is a picture of the girls she was real pretty, but she didn't live long. No, there war't no children. When the depression came. Bill was laid off, and he couldn't get work anywhere. He was so lonely, he game on home. He fixed up things around the place a lot and helped his Pa on the farm. Then after he had been home about a month or two, the C.W.A. started up, and he asked the heads of that for work. They first made him timekeeper on one of the jobs. Then they had him to pay off the workers. That was particular work. He never did get back in the work like he had with the aluminum company.
"He's in charge of the Fire Department in town. And he's married again. His wife is pretty and smart, too. She's been working in the post office for years, and makes a big salary. Her mother is living in the house with them and takes care of the baby, a fine, pretty, little girl. She'll be a year old come March. They've bought a house In Winnsboro and rent a room upstairs to a county nurse. Both working, they can soon pay for it.
"They said that's the only way they could get a home of their very own. Dan and I always said we hoped all of our children could have a home. We never wanted then to live in a rented house.
"Yes, me and Dan always thought it'd be nice to live in town just so's we could have the electric lights and a bathroom like ay brother has in Columbia. But we'd never thought about such a thing as we'd live to have lights and a bathroom out here in the country four miles from Winnsbore. Two years ago the rural electric people told Dan they were running lines all about up the highways Our place being right on the highway, it didn't cost us much. Yes, all the neighbors around has lights now.
"You've been sitting so steady-like in that chair, don't you want to go to the bathroom? Yes'm, we's that proud of all them fixtures, I likes to show them off."
The afternoon was nearly gone, approaching five o'clock, the time on the Richard? a farm to "look after the night work" milking, feeding stock, and laying in a supply of night wood before dark. When, returned, with hands washed in Caroline's clean, porcelain lavatory, which she took such pride in keeping white, Caroline came back from the kitchen with a tray of milk, crisp cookies, some sliced caramel cake, with a lucious filling, which melted in my mouth, and glasses of fruit juice.
"Since I have to live by Dr. Duckner's directions, I eat something this time of day. Won't you have something?"
"Yes, indeed! I can never resist cake and milk, such as this, and I get fruit juices often," I answered. Knowing the clean, sanitary methods used in handling food in the Richards' home, I did not hesitate to drink sweet milk there.
Caroline added I "Ma always had something she could serve the neighbors when they came in and, even when I was a little girl, I can recellect her sending me down to Pa's shop to take him and old Uncle Cab buttermilk and corn bread. Pa said he worked better when he had them extra victuals.
"But I never finished tolling you about how Dan and me got all of our children through school We wanted them to have more schooling than we got. kate, my oldest, didn't go to school until she was eleven years old. I taught her all I could about reading, writing, spelling, and arithmetic. Then she wont to the little country school throe miles from us. She studied hard and learnt all she could get there in about six years, along with reading and studying at at home, too. Back then, when you was old enough and could stand the State Teacher's Examination and got a certificate, you could get a school and teach. Kate took the examination and got a country school. That paid her $40.00 a month and ran about four months in the year. Then she decided she'd take the business course at Draughon's. When she got through there, she got a job in the Associated Charities in Columbia. She worked there about two years. One day she said to me, 'Ma I don't get satisfaction out of making out the reports, writing letters, and keeping office for the Associated Charities, I just believe I'll go in training and learn to be a nurse.' She'd been a good girl helping with expanses here at home.
"So I thought, 'Now if Kate ain't happy a-working in that office, and She wants to study to be a nurse. I'll do all I can to get bar through.' It did not cost us anything. She went up to Baltimore at St. Joseph's and got through there. Then she studied some more at Johns Hopkins. They got her to come back over to St. Joseph's and be superintendent of the operating room.
"When she'd done that for three years, she volunteared to be a foreign missionary to China. They sent her on as a medical missionary to a place called Nanking, to learn the Chinese language before she was sent out to work. After that, she was sent to SutSien Hospital to work in a mission hospital. She carried on a Chinese nurses' training school, and many's the Chinese girl she's trained to 'minister to the needs of their poor people that's in need of being taken care of. She was then sent on to a hospital in Hohin-king in Ku Province. She is still there.
"Kato writes me that sho ain't never worried nor afraid of the dangers.
She feels like she will be taken care of Yes, ma'cm, there's plenty of fighting around her, Why, she said even the grown men go to pieces in some of the fighting. Where she is, the Chinese lovo hen. So, when the fighting started there and they told her she just must get out, some Chinese men carried her in a chair covered with a raincoat. She couldn't take everything she had, just carried her account books; She had to leave her clothes. The men ran through the nob of fighting people. Her friends that saw it told her they expected to see her killed any minute. After they got through, a big cheer went up, they were so happy that they could save her. She's gone on back to the save place, where she is currying on her work with the nurses.
"Yes, we bought our place soon after we were married, and Dan made money in fuming then. We havn't made much since the boll weevil struck us, but we always had come livestock.
"The children helped each other through school. Then, when ay girls went to Winthrop, they didn't spend so such money. They wore uniforms, and tuition was given then. The other three, Maggie, Jane, and Lilly, all went to Winthrop four years. Lilly took the domestic science and housekeeping. She bad a county as home demonstration agents When she had worked there about two years, she got married. Her husband is a farmer. He's a lot older than she is. She teachers in the school there at Hartsville, where she lives.
"Jane has taught all of twelve years; ten of then at the same place, Graham, North Carolina. She went up to New York and studied in the summers. She said she looks just one more summer to got her M. A. degree.
"Maggie is next to Jane. She taught some, but she didn't like teaching school. So she got some office work in Washington. She took one of these Civil Service examinations and got the job. While she was in Washington, she studied at night in a school callad Strayer's. When so many was without work, they out her off. She come home and went to Columbia and finished her course in business at Draughon's. Now she has a good job in Spartanburg with the Department of Agriculture. She makes good and likes it.
"The car? Yes, since they are all working now, Maggie and Jane bought us the car. They leave it here for us, and they use it when they are home. Dan nor me drive; so we don't use it much. We go to Winnsboro and to Columbia when we have business. Once in a great while we go to a picture show. Dan keeps a horse and buggy, and that's the way he does our selling vegetables, milk, fruits, chickens, and eggs. That gives us plenty money to spend. Then, we just about raise everything we have on the table. My girls say they like what we have here better than when they are boarding la towns. We always have milk and butter and all the chickens and eggs we can eat. Dan has a good garden, summer and winter. In winter we have collards, cabbage, turnips, and greens, some kalo, and spinach, carrots, onions, and sweet potatoes. It won't be so long 'til we can plant our spring garden. I believe our strawberries are going to be a failure. They don't look like they are going to bear any hardly. We have a lot to sell la good years. Bill has already been spraying and pruning our fruit trees. We don't keep hogs now. We don't eat much neat, and Dan does not plant any more grain than we need for the table. We've found out we are bet-tor off with othor neats than pork. I always sell enough chickens, eggs, and butter to buy the meats we need.
"Didn't I tell you about Joe, my boy that works with the railroad? He's been, in that railroad office about ever since he's been through school. I reckon about fifteen years.
"Jim and Bob, they just stay here on the farm and help with the work. They didn't ears much about school, and, after they finished in Winnsboro at Mt. Zion Institute under Mrs. Peyton, they didn't want to go no further. That's a lot more education than me and Dan got when we was growing up.
"You know I told you we always wanted our children to hare better changes than we had. Sometimes it's been a hard struggle. But as long as the other children wanted to go to school, and helped each other so much, we was glad to do without spending. We always say we are happy when we are doing for others. I don't grieve about none of the work I've done, nor the way I have dressed. I never buy much to wear. I like to take care of what I have. Cotton dresses are good enough to suit me. I do have one good silk dross and a nice hat, coat, shoes, and even to gloves now. But I didn't have near that much when my children was growing up and in school. "Lawd, yes'm! Dan and me was oven happier then than we are now, with the children doing so many things for us here at home. But my girls say to me when they come home: 'Ma, we are old enough now to appreciate this home and our education and the kind of home life we have always had.' This place is not fine, but there's so much to enjoy, what with all the things we have around us and knowing it belongs to us, with no debts and mortgages.
"We had saved up some money and had it in the Bank of Winnsbore when it closed up in 1951. We do get some of that back all along. Sixty-five percent they have paid back now, and that's a lot better than nothing.
"Each and every one of us say we'd ruther do with this place than live in a finer house that we don't own. I sec plenty won an dressed in fine clothes, going in big ears, and living in brink houses what they had to borrow the Honey to build, Well, that's all right, too; but I hear my son in town say they spend up all their husbands make and don't save to pay down on their debts. We'd do without a oar any day before we'd give up our home All the people living on the Winns boro Mill hill live in good houses, and with pretty furniture and nice green grass yards, with fine shrubs growing in their yards. But then that belongs to the United States Rubber Company people, and I tell you there's nothing like knowing your hone is your'n. Dan and me says we could not live without the scenes we see around us. Just looking out of our window, as we sit here, looks as pretty as any picture you can buy at the store all painted up. Every time of the year, the trees and these hills - some rod clay, and sons core rod with grass - looks pretty to us. I don't never get lonesome. I like to sit quiet and read and write to the children that's away from home. We would of hated for our children to have been brought up In the Mill Village and a-working in the will. Seems like to me, we are more healthier than where people lives all crowded up.
"Well, we don't spend such now for doctors and doctor's medicine. When the children were growing up, their tonsils had to be took out. Some of them had adenoids, too. But they took then out in clinics, and it didn't cost so much. Maggie has had the cans and broke twice. but it knit and got well. Last summer, Dr. Buckner sent her to the hospital in Columbia to have a minor operation. She's been sights better since that. She don't have that old pain in her side and back like she used to. Some of mine had whooping cough, but Lilly never did have it. Then, I was shore enough scared when Joe had the scarlet fever when he was going to school in Winnsboro. No, we done Just what Dr. Buck-ner told us to, and none of the rest took it. Tom had the diptheria once, too. The doctors give a serum, and he wan't sick long. Of course, I have to be particular how, and Dan does, too; but then we are sort of worn-out-like. We have to rest more and be careful how we eat, but I reckon, for old people sixty and seventy-seven years old, we are right lucky. We're thankful, toe, that our children are well shout all the time, 'ceptin' for colds and such like once in awhile.
"Mine don't care shout running around nights or no time. They take after me and Dan, liking to read a lot. Then we play checkers here together. The girls and two of ray boys play card games now, but they learned that since they been grown. And I see no ham that it's doing then, when they don't slight their work to play. Do you think it is?"
"No," I replied. "I believe we all need recreation, and such games for grown people can be played sanely and furnish fine amusement for the young people."
"Dan never liked to go around and get into arguments about politics, and our boys are the sane. Do we vote? "Yes, ma'am, ay girls vote same as the boys. Each one knows why they want to vote for the one they do. We all voted against the liquor, and I know we'd be a heap better off if we didn't have it. None of our children drink. But we sell our produce to the families in the mill, and sometimes some of the women tells Dan that they ain't got the money to pay, as their man drink it all up. But we been selling there long enough to know the people, and some of the best women has drinking husbands. But they generally pay sooner or later, and Dan sees they are in need and gives to them sometimes. We try to vote for up-standing citizens in our town and county. How, if all of the officers were as good as our probate judge, and the clerk of court, we'd have the laws enforced. Dan and me have tried to teach our children, as they were growing up, to appreciate good and honest man and woman who stood for right.
"We've been glad enough for the Government work those lest years. As I told you, we lost in the Bank of Winnsboro when it closed up, and Bill, Lilly, and Maggie, all was home without work. I've told you about Bill having a Job when they had the C.W.A. and then some of the other work, too, 'til he got on in the town as a paid firerman. Lilly went around helping the women that was on the relief rolls to can. And Haggle's job now with the Department of Agriculture is one of these new jobs in the soil conservation work. Haggie said to me the last time she was homes "Ma, we could get along and have enough to eat and a place to live, but I am bettor satisfied to be working and making something.' And she enjoys her work. They are all saving with money, too."
It was getting dark in the room where Caroline and I were sitting, when I realised I must go home in order for Caroline to have her supper at her regular hour, six o'clock. She went with me to the gate, and, while gathering a bunch of flowers for me, she said. "Be sure to come back on Tuesday afternoon at 2:30 when the Presbyterian Auxiliary is meeting with me. They always want to know all about Kate and her work in China." I accepted her invitation as I drove off waving to her standing in the gateway.
Approximately 2,600 words
SOUTH COLROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: IN-LAWS AND T.B.S
Data of First Writing	March 9, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Carrie Johnson
fictitious Name	Jane Carrol
Street Address	House No. 14001/2 (Known Just as 1400 Block)
Place	Winnsboro Mills Winnsboro S. C.
Occupation	winnsboro Mills - Runs sides in Cardroon
Name of Writer	Lucile Clarke Ford
Name of Reviser	Stats Office
"Good morning! Cone inside! I was just sitting Lore on the door- steps rinding Jacqueline to keep her out of the street. She's Just four years old and wants to be out of doors all the time On rainy days, we have to keep her in. You any you Just as soon Sit here as to go inside? This is where I sit all the time in good weather. You can Sit here on this porch in the sun all the winter in the mornings. In summer, it it shady and cool in the afternoons. Here's where our neighbors sit when they come by."
Jane got up from the steps and took one of the chairs close to where I was seated. The porch, about eight feet across and five feet deep, with a substantial banister railing around it, was exactly like the one on the opposite side of the duplex house. The sage-green weather boarded porch wall gave a pleasing background for Jane's golden blonde hair, blue yeyes, and fair, naturally pink complexion. She wore a flowered cotton print, crisply starched and ironed.
"I have been here with Thelma, ay sister, a week," Jane continued. "I always stay over here with her and her husband, Toney, when Bill's gone. He goes about a lot. He's not satisfied long anywhere. I know he oughter go on back to the State Park and stay till he is cured. But he don't want to stay there. He just stayed five months and left there on his own. They wanted him to stay eighteen months, or just as long as it would take to curs him. They are trying to get him back. The nurses tell me it's hard to get them back when they leave like that. They want you to sign up for eighteen months. If you are not cured in that time, you sign again for another eighteen months. No, it wasn't that he was mistreated. Bill said they waited on him and done for him same as if he was a baby. He just didn't like to stay there.
"Bill's Ma is the same way. Dr. Bryson and the health nurses sent her to State Park. They told her she'd oughter stay eighteen months anywho. You want to know how long she was there? It was three or four weeks. I disremember which. They have all moved to a farm in Dutch Fork, Lexington County. I reckon she thought the people there didn't know nor core if she had the T.B.'s or not. So she up and loft that State Park. Looks like she don't care nothing stall about herself. She had all aorta of encouragements to go and then didn't stay.
"Bill's family always lived on farms. They didn't own their land, Just rented. They were born and raised in Lexington County, the Dutch Pork section. It is a good farming county. They moved to Winnsboro Mill Tillage about eight or nine years ago. While they lived here, they moved three times that I know of.
"They lived on the hill once, then moved into the little house on the edge of the mill village. That house belongs to Dr. McCants. There's where they stayed three or four years. They moved over into the Mexico settlement and lived there for several years. It's hard to rent a house here when a family that has had T. B.'s has lived in it. Frew, the house man, gave that house to three different families before anybody lived in it. The ones that moved in fumigated it theirselves. But the outside mill hands had already cleaned it up good. A body never knows when they are moving from place to place whose been in that house and what they have died of.
"I wish I could get rooms here on the hill where I could have a bathroom, lights, and water. We have a sanitary privy outside there la Mexico. There is a house near us that has a faucet in the back yard. I have to get my water from there. I do enjoy the bathroom here at Thelma's. The houses over in Mexico belongs to different men uptown. They ain't much houses, and nothing's around them like the grass and shrubbery the mill houses have around them. I just rent two rooms, and it costs me $1.25 a week. They ain't big enough to cuss a cat in. Look like they ain't never, been fixed up. I have to sleep in one room, and we cook, eat, and sit in the other. Thelma and Toney just pay fifty cents every week for each room. She has two rooms and the bathroom and this porch. Thelma can here a garden here in her back lot, but she don't have one. All of us go to the mill. Then we do all the work here together. When I stay here, I help with Jacqueline and the work in the house, too. I don't pay any board. There's plenty of room in the bedroom for Thelma and Toney and Jacqueline. It's cool in the summer.
"I have to be at the mill at four o'clock every afternoon and stay there till twelve at night. We can buy a supper at the mill. I eat some- where between six-thirty and eight o'clock at night. Sometimes, when I go to bed at twelve, I don't get up next morning till ten-thirty. I do get up at six some mornings, because I like to eat breakfast with the rest. It tastes better, and I eat more. But I hardly ever go back to bed after I get up that early. At night, I get a glass of milk, some crackers, and maybe candy.
"I don't mind the work at night. I can't go to the picture show. The church don't like for us to go to pictures. I do hats to miss the Mother's Club, though. That's such a help to the people. They have good times when they meet and sew. When a body that is down and out has a baby, they will send them clothes. I have known them to give a whole outfit for a baby, when a family was in bad. Seems like all women not working at night would go to the Mother's Club. But they don't care so much about going, and those that work at night have to give up such as that.
"There's the Community House, I guess it's more for men. If women visit the sick and do for the people that need them, it will give them plenty to do. Bill has always had a good job, and I've been lucky, too. But last year, when Bill was so sick and our little baby took sick and died no suddenly, the mill was laying off hands, and I couldn't get nothing to do. There was plenty that didn't have work in the mill. I signed up and got some of the Government work.
"First thing, I got a notice to go to the NYA. Mrs. Ford was foreman. A crowd of girls, most of than younger than me, sewed every day. We worked by the Government hours. That was the easiest work ever I did. We could sew on whatever materials Mrs. Ford could get for us. Just as luck would have it, Mrs. Wright, they called her attendance officer for the schools, brought bolts and bolts of the prettiest soft cotton cloth. It was pink, blue, peach, and lavender. She wanted baby clothes made. She said that after she would get clothes enought to go around in a big family, there would generally be a new baby and no clothes and no money to spare for It.
"Did I enjoy sewing on them baby clothes? Well, I guess! Looks like after my baby had died. I couldn't have sewed on baby clothes. But I enjoyed asking up all kinds of little dresses, sacks, wrappers, and everything. Trouble was. I didn't make but five dollars and twenty-five cents a week, and we couldn't work straight time. Had to work a week and lay off a week. That gave me ten dollars and fifty cents a month to live on. Then Bill left the State Park. When the nurses come to see me, I promised them we would sleep in separate rooms. They said I would catch T.B.'s from him and that maybe another baby would come and be sickly and die like our little boy did. We couldn't hardly get oh with Bill not working. My people helped us some. His people couldn't do much for us. So many of them an sick about all the time. Sickliest people ever you saw. My folks, the Waters, ain't that way.
"The Government workers helped to get me on WPA. I was put to work at the Potato House, they called it. We sewed there, making rugs and quilts. I made twenty-one dollars a month. They sent for me to come back to the mill, when they started up full time in August. I make ten dollars a week. That's more than I could make at Government work. Back when I first learned to run sides, I could make as much as fourteen dollars a week. With the new stretch-out system and letting several work on the same job, ten dollars is as much as I ever make now. Bill and me both have to get on with that. It takes it, too, when house rent is paid and groceries and medicine is bought. I don't have a cent left to buy clothes or furniture or anything for the house. I do have to buy Bill clothes and a suit once in awhile. I always buy on the installment pa now dress about everytime I got a check. I have been wearing my old dresses two years.
"If the rest of the people didn't buy no more than we do, Mr. Belk's and all the other dry goods stores in Winnsboro would close up, Mrs. Propst did close in the hard times. They said he went into bankrupt. None of us here at the mills dress like we used to. You can see women wearing a plain cotton print out around the neighborhood now, even down to wives of boss men. Before the hard times, we wouldn't go nowhere without a good silk or satin dress on, summer and winter. But I'm thankful I have my health and con work. We never have had a collection taken for us. Everybody was having it hard when our baby died. I don't know what we would have done along about then if I hadn't had that Government work. Of course, they do say there is always a way, but I sure have been thankful for that work and my health.
"I like to eat, and I want my three meals a day. We just about have the same kind of breakfast every day. Most of the tine it's grits, eggs, toast, and coffee. Sometimes we have bacon or ban, if we feel like we can afford it. Once in a while we got steak for our dinner. When I stayed in that house in Mexico and took care of Bill. I couldn't oat any breakfast. Thelma's been making me stay here, and we fix up and eat all kinds of good things. But you can look at her and see she gets plenty to eat. Our people, the Walters, always had a plenty to eat and didn't have much sickness.
"My folks lived here about nine years. This where I met Bill. We were married here. Pa worked in the cardroom. He got sick just when they were laying off hands, and he was not taken back on his work after he got well. He got thirteen weeks' pay from insurance the mill gives people when they are sick. That thirteen weeks he got about seven dollars and fifty cents a week. That was a help, but not what he needed. He is not but fifty-five or fifty-six years old, but he's about done for in the mill. Now he's trying to learn something else. He's moved to a fans near Lancaster. He thinks he will like it.
"Mill work is all I know, and I don't believe I could do anything else. I like my job and try to run it the best I can. I can't stand to be without work, and, even when I don't got so much, I like my regular pay check coming. If I tried it out in the country. I know I'd die. It seem so quiet and lonely. I like to see people going and coming and to have somewhere to go myself. Here we have nice yards with green grass, shrubbery, flowers and trees, all planted by the mill company, and they keep it up. Thelma don't try to have a garden and chickens, but she does have a cow and pigs. They killed a pig not long ego. It's a lot of help.
"None of us have a car. There's do many accidents and so many people getting killed. I don't even want one. I couldn't haver pay for a oar out of what I make. Some people that have then and drive so much, I don't see how they make it on their pay. You can get on here without one. Can get a taxi uptown for ten cents. It's twenty cents a round trip. But I don't mind walking, I never expect to own a home, either. I know we will always have to rent. But my people has always rented, and all of Bill's people too, and they always got on.
"Bill's people have so much sickness all the time. I don't visit there. I'd rather be with my own folks. His mother coughs and spits up all the time. But she goes right on about the house work, cooking and everything. Bill's father is named Charlie Johnson. He has a brother, Clyde, about forty years old. He was sent to State Park, but wouldn't stay. His wife is dead. She got right weakly and died after she had been married to him a few years. I ain't kept up with them. I don't know whether any of her children are living yet or not. There's Pat's family, he is Bill's brother living at Rockton. The health nurses tested them and say none of them have T.B.'s. He has work here in the mill. There's another brother, Harry, about sixteen years old. He is at home.
"Bill's sister, Edna, is fourteen years old. She has T.B.'s and is the only one of that family that stays at State Park. She's been there a year on March the 19. When she went there last year, she weighed eighty-five pounds. Looked just like a bar of soap after a day's washing. You just oughter see her now. Thelma and me got a chance to go to see her Sunday. She weighs one hundred and five pounds now. She didn't cough before she went there, but she was bad to have colds and was thin. She wouldn't eat nothing, either. Now she eats. I wish you could see the tray full of vittles she eat Sunday while we was there. She says they have good stuff like that all the time. She had chicken and ice cream. Sometimes they have ham and steak. And she drinks milk three times a day. They don't give her medicine often. But when they do have to give it to her, she says they put it in her vittles and she don't know she's taking it. She told us about having to take gas. It's put in with a big needle. I don't know what it means. You may know. It has 200 c.c. on it. She says it don't hurt. She has to take it about wtwice a week.
"They wear pajamas at State Park. She took hers with her. She also took a comb, a brush, a tooth brush, a house coat, and bedroom slippers. The State Park furnishes all the sheets, cover, towels, and soap. Mr. Turnor, the superintendent of the school here, has been such a help to her. He had to go to a place called Oteen, in North Carolina, after he was gassed in the war. He stayed there until he was cured. He told Edna that still and pet he goes to bed and rests when he gets home every day. Edna says she is going to stay at State Park till she is cured.
"Bill didn't look thin and bad when they took him to the State Park. He's tall and fine looking, about three inches taller than I am. He lied about his ago. He wasn't but seventeen when we married two years ago. I was nineteen. He says he was afraid I wouldn't have married him if I had known his age. He ain't but nineteen now.
"I can vote this year, being as I am twenty-one. I don't care nothing about it, but it might help somebody else if I vote. That's one thing my pa never talked. He voted, and I never have heard him say a time who he was going to vote for.
"Mr. Ellenberg preaches at the Holiness Baptist Church. And I never hear him say a thing against women voting. I like to go to church, but I don't pay much to the church. I ain't able to.
Approximately 3,600 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE: AN RVENING IN THE SMITH HOME
Date of First Writing	February 14, 1939
Name of Persons Interviewed	Mr.& Mrs. Tally Smith
Fictitious Name	None used
Street Address	1100 Block, House No.1101½ Winnsboro Mills, Columbia Rd.
Place
Winnsboro Mill Village, Winnsboro, South Carolina
Occupation	Mill Operative -Mr. Smith runs sides in twister room.
Name of Writer	Lucile Clarke Ford
Name of Reviser	State Office
Essie Mae, neatly dressed in a soft green crepe, with crisp white collar and cuffs, opened the front door to let me in. A glowing bed of sabers gave added cheer, as well as warmth, to the comfortable living room.
"Ma's looking for you to sit with us a while tonight", Essie Mae said. "She'll be here in about half an hour."
Seeing notebooks, pencil, and paper, I said: "Perhaps you are too busy to be interrupted. Are you studying for something?"
"No, I'm not studying. I just write off these scales and music notes for some of my friends who like music."
"You have a music class?"
"No, it isn't a class, I just help some of my friends. I can't play so much myself, but I learned how to write out music in my music lessons at Mt. Zion Institute and at the Everette School here in the Winnsboro Hill village. And what I do know I am glad to show others. So many of my friends love music and want to play. Some have learned to read their notes and can play hymns and songs. We don't have much time to practice and study, except at night. Nearly all of my friends work in the mill or in some store uptown. I clerk in the ten cont store, Rose's. It's a nice place to work, and I enjoy working there. I don't make so much, but it gives me plenty to buy my clothes and have my own spending money. I help some hero at home, too. I bought the furniture in my room, but I don't pay board.
"I have a savings account at the Merchants and Planters Bank in Winnsboro. I keep a Christmas savings account, too. And I give one tenth of my pay check to the church, besides helping out when we have calls for sick and needy cases among our neighbors. The mill has a little hospital and a nurse. And old Dr. Lindsay goes to the people that need a doctor. Of course, the people don't have it so easy as they used to, and in some families there are not enough working to keep up a family. There 'a Jimmy, our neighbor next door. He's crippled with some kind of bone trouble and can't walk. I try to bring him something from uptown to keep him from getting so tired of just sitting there. Ma, she goes over there once every day, and I go at night when I get home. If we just drop in and right out again, he says it keeps him from being lonesome. We do such as that among the people because we enjoy it. But the Winnsboro Mills don't let anybody suffer. If they work and try at all they can get along fairly well. Do you remember last fall when Donald Dawkins got drowned in Wateree River? Well, there wasn't anything the mill didn't do to help out.
"Them that has big families of little children do have it hard. But plenty of times, in case of extra sickness and trouble, we get together and pound a family. New people, we always pound. Our churches and church societies do such as that, too."
Laughter was heard from the back, and in a few minutes Mr. and Mrs. Smith cane in. Mattie began talking as soon as she entered the room.
"We had supper soon after four o'clock, and, when Essie Mae returned from her work uptown with the car, Tally and me went to the farm to feed and water our livestock and to milk the cows. Then we came back by the mill company's pasture to milkaacowwwe have there. The clock has struck seven-thirty. Sorry you had to wait here for us.
"It's like this all the time here with us," Mattie continued. "We go to the mill at eight in the morning and work eight hours. They give us tine out to eat our lunch, which we take to the mill with us. We come home at four o'clock, and from then to six, we do what we want to here about the place. When Essie Mae gets home free the ten cent store with the car, Tally and me gets in it and drives out here about two miles in the country, where we've got a little from rented. There we have cows, chickens, pigs, and a garden. We hire a Negro family to work and keep the place, but we go every day to see about things."
"Do you object to this busy life and £ct tired from the daily duties?" I asked.
"No," replied Tally, grinning, "I dodge all the work at the rill, let the other fellow do it. And its the same here at home, where Hattie and Dan and Essie Mae have to do what's to be done."
"I had a lot rather be busy working," Mattie rejoined, "than to be doing nothing. There are people that spend all their time at the Community House and uptown at picture shows and never do any work at home. I don't know when I've been to a picture show. I can, have a better time with the kind of duties it takes to feed up, milk, and take care of animals. We've used to work. I've done it all my life. My mother died when I was two years and seven months old, and Clyde, my baby brother, was nine months old. I was eighteen and my brother sixteen, when Pa married the second time."
With a chucklo, she continued, "Then he married a widow who already had six children. Now they have nine of their own. There's one dead. It died when a baby. He would have been ten years old now. That makes my pa have eleven children. And the widow with her nine by in and the six she already had gives her fifteen, don't it?"
"I married when I was eighteen, about the time Pa married the second time. They never worked in the Winnsboro Mills. They raised a plenty to eat and lots of cotton, 'til the boll weevil got so bad."
Tally, who had listened to us very attentively, spoke up: "There were seven boys in our family. One brother died four years ago at the age of fifty-one. There were three girls, and all died young. But there's my grandpa, he lived to be ninety-five years old. His wife was five years younger. When she died, she hadn't been in bed but two days. She was busy all her life. They had ten children. Six of us are still living. Half of us live in mills, and the other three are living in the country. One of my brothers lives here in Winnssboro Mill village. John lives at a mill in Onion. Norman is at a mill in Santuck, with Alwert. Norman, he's all drawn with rheumatism. Can't work any more. He has to be taken care of and waited on like a baby. We all together give what we can for his support. Doctor's medicine don't help him atall. Heljust gets worse.
"Then there's Pa, he's been helpless five years, paralyzed. But I pay twenty cents every week out of ray check to the old age pension. It can't go to Pa in his old age. I don't understand a thing in the world about that old age pension money, and nobody else does. I don't believe the ones that made the law know anything about it. Pa has a little land that he would mortgage if he could get in on that old age pension.
"My stepmother and the children take care of him. He's done well, though, to raise, help feed, and take care of sixteen children. We all knew how to work. On the farm I knocked cottonstalks, cut cornstalks, sprouted many a new ground, to get ready for the next year's planting, and helped get up the wood to burn for a family of twelve.
"We lived on rented land most of our lives. Pa was a sharecropper, moving from one farm, to another. Like Mattie told you, we rest the little place we have our cove and other stock on a few miles out here in the country. I never owned a foot of land, but I mean to before I die. That's why the old lady and me's willing to work so steady now. I want to have a shelter over our heads and not be dependent on the other fellow. I don't know, though, we don't save a great deal, but we all work hard all the time. We never would have left the farm if old Mr. Boll Weevil hadn't come along when he did. Why, he just eat us out of everything. We held on a few years. We I've been here in the Winnsboro Kill seventeen years. Ten years in this sane house. I liked the farm fine when we were making money, but, as things were, we couldn't get along atall. I like it here in the Winnsboro Mills. I do get blue sometimes shut in here. Then I get out on the little place we rent and forget myself and the blues. It's a groat thing to have something to do on the aide like that. Besides, we can have ft lot of things that we couldn't have without our farm work. Hattie, show her what we have here in the house."
Mattie led the way through the hall and into the bathroom. There we saw a long pole fastened across the bathroom from wall to wall, on which was hanging large hams, shoulders, and sides of meat. Mattie said, "I reckon you will think we are eating too much hog neat. But it takes it when we work, and it keeps us from having big grocery bills. We don't buy so much. This neat is from three big hogs. The company lets us have our chickens and a vegetable garden here in the back yard. We've told you about the cows and pigs down in the company pastures and the things we have out on the farm. We like milk, butter, eggs, chickens, vegetables, hog moat and our own lard. There is little left to buy.
"There's Essie Mae, she makes her money, but she buys what she wants and saves her money. We don't stint her nor take her money for board. Why, Tally gives her money to go to the show or buy any little things she wants uptown. She is not wasteful with it. She gives her tenth to the church, as we do. We all give ten cents of every dollar we make to the church, besides what we give here in the neighborhood in sickness and deaths.
"We send flowers to funerals when there's a death. Of course, maybe we oughtn't to do that, but we work hard and enjoy giving in those ways. I think about when we are old or in trouble it would be nice to know our neighbor friends thought that much of us. I'd hate to have a collection taken up for any of us, but then a body can't help getting down and out sometimes.
"Mr. Dean, Tally's overseer, does dearly love to make up a purse to help any one that's sick and in need. Then the churches all help, and the mill company will do for people in case of their needing it. The Bible teaches us to help them that's in need, don't it?"
"There's Essie Mae working in the ten cent store, and she gives a dime out of every dollar she makes to our Baptist Church. But then she enjoys giving. Every day she brings home fruit, candy, or something that gives that cripple boy living next door to us some pleasure. She feels that sorry for him sitting there day in day out. And she's so thankful she is able to work, she says she oughter do all she can for such people. Just today, she took her hour off at dinner time to come home with the car and take her cousin, whose husband was killed on the railroad track by the six o'clock train Sunday, to the cemetery to make kodak pictures of her husband's grave and the flowers.
"It was Mr. Sides' wife. She is my cousin," Mattie said. With a forlorn expression on her usual smiling countenance, she continued, "Why, his wife had just got out of the car to go home. They live over there on the mill hill hear the railroad track. Her husband, Olin, was going on uptown. There's a sort of a hill to drive up on at the track, and when he got up it the car went dead. After the train stopped, they examined him and found his leather jacket sleeve hurjg tight to the handle of the car door. Anna, his wife, said she couldn't make out why he didn't jump to save hisself.
"Poor thing, she's grieving herself to death. Why, they had the funeral two days after he was killed. Exactly forty-eight hours after that six o'clock train struck him, the casket was being lowered in the grave and our preacher was saying 'ashes to ashes and dust to dust.' Then I thought poor Anna was going crazy. We just had to hold her when that train blew for that same crossing at six o'clock. That was the most mournful sound over I heard in my life.
"I have never seen so many pretty designs of flowers, and the artificials are just as pretty as they were the day they ware put there. They stand the rain and bad weather and will be pretty for weeks yet."
Dan, ten years old, was sitting on a rug in front of the fire playing with marbles, when a loud crash was heard on the front porch. I expected the front door to fly open. Tally laughed heartily, and looking at Dan, he said: "There they are, Dan! Go open the door. Don't be scared. You know they'll keep up that notes 'til you go out."
"Hey! What you doing? Come on in! All were laughing as they vent to the porch. Mattie explained! "Why, this is Valentine's night. They do this once a year, around to the homes of frineds and them they know well. They keep on rocking the house 'til the one it's being done for comes out." There were sticks, rocks, and some pieces of timber piled on the doorsteps.
"They don't mean no harm," Mettie said, "that's just fun they're haring. I have known of them throwing buckets of cold water at the doors, but that's been a long time back. That was just carrying it too far. We could report it to the police force and have it all stopped if they was doing any harm. Order is kept here all the time, and children are not allowed to take this village. I have heard of people having trouble about things on the outside at other mills. This mill company don't stand for nothing being destroyed and bothered. Our chickens and gardens are as safe here as when we lived in the country.
"There are drawbacks to everything, but we get along with our neighbors and always have. We would miss them, too, out on a farm, but Tally and me say we are going back to the farm before we die, as we have told you before. We want to save up money enough to have a home in the country with all conveniences. There are a lot of things about the mill village we would miss. But wouldn't it be a good feeling when we are old to think we lived in our own house? We just couldn't get on without the car. It gives us a way to go out to that farm and Essie Mae a way to get uptown to her work, besides going other places for pleasure. Looks like a body needs some enjoyment when they've worked hard.
"Tally's always done a good part by his family. He votes a straight democratic ticket. He don't care about taking part in politics, but he supports the party. Of course, we don't 'prove of this liquor bill. So many down here don't have what they would, if the men didn't take their pay checks and spend it for liquor instead of groceries and clothes. That's what makes some of our people look so poor and hard-up. Money is just being used the wrong way.
"We couldn't waste and throw away money and do what we want to for these younguns of ours. It's like I tell you, Tally's been a good husband and a good man in his home, but he don't know nothing in book learning."
"No," Tally interrupted, "we had nothing but a little country school when I grew up. One teacher had all the grades and a crowd of children. I walked four miles to the school. Went early and stayed late. Most of the time that school was going on, I had to be busy there on the farm, doing all the jobs I've already told you we did there."
"With me it was different, Mattie rejoined. "I didn't do so much work in winter. I loved my books and want through seven grades. We have worked and tried to keep Essie Mae and Dan in school. Essie Mae liked school and, when she finished the seventh grade down here in Everette School, she went on uptown to Mr. Zion Institute. She graduated there in four years. That's like a college, I tell her. I hope we can just get Dan through there, too. He don't try like Essie Mae. He plays and don't get near the good grades she used to get."
"Boys just don't seem to care so much about books, Tally said. "But we are going to see him through Mt. Zion, if he will go on and do as well as he's doing down here. There is no use of boys and girls growing up without an education now. Why, they teach them everything. They have cooking and sowing down here in our school and in the Mt. Zion school, too. They have a shop for boys to learn carpentry and a regular little mill down at Everette. Teach then all kinds of mill work there."
"Besides being a good citizen in the community and a hard working man, "Mattie spoke in behalf of her husband, "Tally is a deacon in the Stephen Green Memorial Baptist Church, and a member of the Men's Bible Class. He's been president of it several times. Yes, we all think a lot of Mr. Padgett, our pastor. I don't know what we'd do if it wasn't for him Here in our midst, always doing good wherever he goes. I was baptized when I was about twelve years old. Tally didn't join the church until he was twenty-one. We had been married a year, when he just up and said to me one day, "Mattie, I am going to join the church Sunday and be baptized." I said, "You might as well, Tally, you live a Christian life anyway. And you could do a lot of good, if you would join the church.' All of our children just naturally grew up in the church, going with us every Sunday."
We heard footsteps. Soon the front door opened and Essie Mae and the young man she had gone out with came in. I learned that the young man, Mr. Arrington, was instructor in the shop or manual arts room at the mill school, Everette. He had a violin case in his hand.
Essie Mae said, "He helps with our church music, and we have just been practicing for Sunday's services." As the clock struck ten-thirty, Mr. Arrington said good-bye to all of us. I could not refrain from saying, "He looks like a nice young man, Essie Mae." She blushingly said, "He is nice, but we're just good friends."
"I must be going," I said. "The time has passed so fast and pleasantly, I had no idea it was so late."
"Oh, that's all right," said Tally and Mattie in the same breath.
"Come back again as soon as you can, and you'll always find our latchstring hangs on the outside of the door."
"Then I think I will be back for breakfast, to have some of that good ham you showed me. I have certainly enjoyed the evening and expect to see you again soon.