Approximately 4,000 words
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS' PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
A COMMUNITY MAN
Date of First Writing	January 30, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	Mr. W. T. J. Lever (white)
Fictitious Name	T. J. Oliver
Street Address	Route #1
Place	Blythewood, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer
Name of Writer	L. E. Cogburn
Name of Reviser	State Office
Rounding the curves, pulling the hills, and crossing through woods and creeks, between the Monticello road and the home of T. J. Oliver, in the hills of the Big Cedar Creek section fifteen miles northwest of Columbia, brought to mind the old couplet,
"Over the river and through the woods
To Grandfather's house we go."
It was the day before Christmas eve. As I pulled up into the fromt yard, explosive cracklings and poppings resounded from the field on the slant of the hill. Three men and several hogs were moving leisurely about the scene of explosives. One of the men, sighting me, started toward the house.
It was Mr. Oliver himself, a bit stooped but of about average height and weight, his dark hair much streaked with gray. His brown eyes appraised me keenly until he was close enough for recognition and then they lighted with the greeting of a cordial handshake.
'This is the day set for coming, if you've been too busy to remember," I reminded him. "I hope it doesn't break into your plans."
"Yes, I remember. There's nothing pushing to do until this afternoon, then I must go to Blythewood. Get out and come in."
"Let's see what you're doing down in the field first. Are Arthur and Claude at home? Looks like them down there."
"Yes, they're both at home, playing boys again with their pranks."
With exchanges of Christmas greetings, I shook hands with them, Arthur first. He is the oldest son, near the middle thirties, and a little taller than his father, but has his father's dark hair, and his mother's blue eyes and light complexion. Claude, probably thirty, of average height but broad-shouldered and heavy, has dark hair, but his eyes are blue and complexion light.
"Family forms and features run pretty true to patterns," I commented. "That indicates, I believe, a long line of blooded ancestry. Weren't you exploding something down here a few minutes ago?"
"Yes, we were chastising the hogs," Claude explained. "They were eating the com Papa put here for the turkeys. We blasted them with firecrackers. A bit of fun and right effective. They've yielded ground and retreated down the hill."
"Yes, they'll not come back right soon," said Mr. Oliver. "Suppose we go to the house and get by the fire."
The house, a large two-story, T-shaped frame structure, stands on the crest of a hill gently sloping for a half mile to the swamps of Big Cedar Creek. Large oak trees stand in front, on an abrupt slope extending fifty yards to a branch. A windmill, pumping water for the farm, stood in the back yard. A hundred yards to the rear is the stock lot, enclosed by a scraggly plank fence. Hear its center stood the old bam and stables.
The home of the Olivers burned in January, 1956. All the family were absent. Mr. Oliver, returning from his work of terracing some neighborhood farm, came in sight of the house just in time to see the cloud of smoke burst into a sheet of flame. Nothing could be saved except a table or two. The new house, built by sections as time and funds have permitted, is not yet finished inside and the exterior not yet painted.
"We'll go in here," Mr. Oliver said, turning to the rear of the building - the stem of the T. "Here's where we live mostly. I built these three rooms first, after we were burned out."
Here in a room used for both living and dining room were Mrs. Oliver and Lillian, their daughter. Mrs. Oliver, her eyes blue, complexion light, and her figure of the stocky type, looked better preserved than her husband, though her hair was quite gray. Lillian, in the middle twenties, is a small, slender brunette, with dark hair and brown eyes like her father's.
"We'd just finished breakfast when you came," Mrs. Oliver apologized," and haven't finished cleaning the house. We were all up late last night and took our time about getting up this morning."
"It isn't so late," I replied. "I came early so as to catch Mr. Oliver at homes"
"Sunrise is late for Mother," Lillian said. "Papa, the fire is going to need some wood before you get through with your life story. Arthur and Claude are going to hunt holly end mistletoe. I'll have the Christmas cards finished by the time you've fixed the fire. Then you may have the room ell to yourselves."
Mrs. Oliver returned to the kitchen, end, while Mr. Oliver went for wood, I sat with Lillian, planning anew the course of the interview.
But it was Arthur that brought in the wood. Claude and Mr. Oliver, with a rabbit nestled on his breast, came in a little later.
"How did you catch it?" I asked.
"Claude caught him."
"You don't mean he ran the rabbit down."
"No, he caught him in a trap."
"What are you going to do with him, Papa?" Lillian asked.
"Kill him."
"Please don't kill the poor little thing. Turn him loose."
"Yes, I am going to kill him. He has been eating my rutabagas, now I'm going to eat him. There is no better meat to eat. Here, Claude, take him out and dress him."
Lillian, taking her cards from the table, said, "You all use this table, end I'll go help Mama in the kitchen."
Mr. Oliver, pushing the table nearer the fire, said, "I wonder what's the object of having these stories written."
"The same question has come to my mind. You know this is being done all over the South. Stories giving true pictures of the problems and struggles of Southern people may throw some light on Problem No. 1. But I think the purpose is more literary than social. Some of the beat sellers contain just such material as will be in these stories.
"If an account of my life can do any good, I will gladly give it. But where shall I begin! I was born and reared on this acre, part of the original grant from the King of England, handed down to us by our forefathers."
"That's a fine start."
In a pensive mood, he continued, "We are of French descent. The story goes that we descended from Isaac Oliver, Le Olivere. In 1685, during the reign of King Louis XLV of France, the Protestants were not only forbidden to worship God in their own way, but were forbidden to leave their country on penalty of death. Isaac stated that nearly all of his family had been put to death while trying to escape across the closely guarded borders of Alsace-Lorraine, and that he, the only one of the family, with great hazard, barely escaped and went into Germany and lived for a short time. On hearing that William Penn, proprieter of the province of Pennsylvania, in North America, resided in London, he and a few of his friends went to London.
"In the party was a French woman, very attractive and resourceful. She made inquiries as to where Penn might be found. While the directions were being given, a coach came dashing down the street. She was told that the man in the coach was Penn going to his office. She, running toward the moving vehicle and addressing him in French, attracted his attention. The coach stopped. Not being able to speak English, it was fortunate for her that Penn had studied in Paris and could speak fluently in her native tongue. She gained an appointment, during which she unfolded the story of what they had recently gone through with in France. Penn gave her a letter of introduction to his agent. A grant of land in Pennsylvania was made to her. Isaac, after wards in Pennsylvania, married one of her daughters. My great-grandfather, William Oliver, fought for the American cause in the Revolutionary War.
"As far as we know, all the Olivers in South Carolina are descendants of John and Sam Oliver, who were born and reared in Lexington County end moved to Richland County after the War of 1812. My grandfather, John Oliver, fought in the War of 1812. He married Nancy Brown, daughter of William Brown, who is living on Big Cedar Creek, on land granted by the English King. He had five boys and four girls. My father, Jackson J. Oliver, one of the five boys, was born and reared on this original grant. On the day of Secession he married Susan Wessinger, who was of German descent. They had four boys and five girls. Two of my brothers and one sister have died. All of the surviving members, including myself, live on farms.
"My grandfather was an educated man. I had all of his old books in the house when it was burned. French books, German books, end all the other old books, a collection of ages, were burned. I would not have taken a thousand dollars for them.
"After the Civil War, my father built a log cabin here on the place. In it I went to school to a lady teacher until I was eight years of age. The room was heated by a big fireplace and had no glass windows. We did not have desks, but had to sit on, slabs supported by wooden legs. Had no blackboards. Slates were used to cipher and write on. The more advanced pupils used foolscap paper as copy books. The teacher would set the copy at the top of the page, and the pupil would copy line after line until the page was filled to the bottom. The recitation bench was up at the front near the fireplace, but we would always stand in line during the spelling recitation. If a word was missed, as often was the case, it would be passed on down and through the length of the line until some one spelled it. The successful speller would advance near the head of the class.
"Sixty years ago, my father gave the land and the lumber, and the neighbors helped build a new schoolhouse. This was the Belleview High School, the first in upper Richland County after the Civil War. We were proud of it. I have the old blackboard, made of wide pine boards, in my barn now.
"Mr. B. R. Turnipseed, Dr. B. Rhett Turnipseed's father, was our teacher. He was paid by the patrons of the school. I have never attended a public school; that is, one that is run by paying the expenses from the public treasury. The school term was eight months in the year. I had to walk five miles to this school. I attended school here four years and completed requirements for college entrance, which was equivalent to the tenth grade.
"At twenty years of ago, I applied for admission to Clemson College, the first year it was opened. I remember, in sending application, I wrote 'proff. Clinkscale,' looked at it, and said, 'No, that's not right,' and I erased one of the f's. I was not accepted, turned down because of the limited capacity of the school. At the beginning of the nineties, the low price of cotton caused a shortage of money on the farms. My father could have paid my expenses at Clemson, but not at the more expensive colleges, as Wofford or the University of South Carolina.
"I wanted to go to college. Thinking I might got something to do at Leesville College, I tried there; but Dr. Koon, the president, told me he had nothing I could do. So I was not able to attend college."
As further explanation, Mr. Oliver pulled forth a roll of Confederate money from a box of souvenirs, fondling it, he handed it to me, saying, "This partly explains why I was not able to obtain a college education. This is a part of $9,000 that was loft on my daddy's hands after he had served four years in the Confederate Army. During those trying times following the Civil War, he did well to raise so large a family and give us the opportunities we had.
"Because of the cramped conditions on the farm in 1893, I tried city life. I worked as city deliveryman for the Southern Express Company in Columbia for two years, at thirty-five dollars a month. This was as skilled labor, ten to twelve hours a day. I worked all over the city, and knew it like a book.
"During these two years, I learned one thing thoroughly, and that was I did not like city life. I went to Florida to go in the citrous business with my uncle. I was there during the big freeze of 1995, which knocked the business out. While down there, I tried truck farming but did not find it profitable. I came back home on May 12, 1896. All these times, I never laid down my books. I read and studied everything I could find that I thought would be educative.
"In 1896, I stood the teacher's examination in Fairfield County and made grade A, 70. I taught two years in public schools, and then got married. And I've been taught ever since."
He said this rather loudly, wishing to be overheard by his wife, who was busy in the kitchen, the adjoining room. And again, quite loudly, "I wonder if the ol' o'man heard what I said." Turning to me, he whispered, "We are going to have some fun now."
Appearing in the doorway, a dish and drying cloth in hand, Mrs. Oliver asked, "What is that you've been telling?"
"I was just relating a bit of the history of my life. Sometimes I feel that it might be called ancient history, yet I know it is current. I said that I taught school two years and then got married and have been taught ever since."
Smiling, yet apparently in earnest, she came back at him: "That's just the way with you men. You make us think we are having our own way, end, at the same time, you are leading us around by the nose. And the strange thing about it to me, and I guess amusing to him, is that I think I'm having my own way all the time."
"Judging from the results of your efforts, these fine sons and daughters you have reared and educated, you must have had a mutual Understanding at least on the more important questions," I commented.
"I love to tease her," resumed Oliver.
"On February 15, 1899, I married Annie Riley of Saluda County, near Chappells. I changed from school teaching to farming that year, and I've been farming ever since.
"Two sons and two daughters were born to us. I had promised myself if I ever had any children I would give each a college degree. Well, it was a hard struggle to keep up the standard of living on a two-horse farm, with the high price of labor and the low price of cotton, six and seven cents a pound, and the boys off at college. But each one was willing to help and did help with expenses by working. Claude had worked with the canteen at Wofford. Winnifred had a dining room scholarship at Greenville Woman's College, and Lillian, after her sophomore year, at the Columbia College, assisted in teaching.
"All have college degrees now, and I believe are doing well. Lillian is teaching home economics in the high school at Great Falls, and Claude is teaching manual training in the high school at Chester. Winnifred married a farmer end lives near us. Arthur is a member of the South Carolina Methodist Conference. During his four years as pastor of the Chandler Memorial Church in Columbia, he did all the work, except writing the thesis for his M. A. at the University of South Carolina. He is now on leave of absence from the conference and is studying for his Ph. D. at Duke University.
"In 1909, seeing the need of improvement in our farm work, I took a correspondence course in soils and agriculture with Clemson College. About that time, farm demonstration work was being started in this county, and I was appointed as assistant farm demonstrator of Richland County. I continued in this work until 1922. At the same time, I was running my farm at home. My work being throughout the county, I used a horse and buggy for transportation until 1916, when I bought a Model-T Ford. But because of bad roads, I had to leave it in the garage a great part of the time end drive my horse and buggy. During this time, I finished all short courses offered, at Clemson, to agricultural workers as preparation for their work.
"Since the coming of the boll weevil, cotton farming has been altogether unprofitable. In this section, cotton is supplemented by poultry end livestock.
"Since 1935, I have been employed as emergency agricultural teacher. My work in this has been soil conservation, such as checking old terraces and surveying lines for new ones. I try to impress on the farmers that to keep the fire in fireplaces end stoves is still the first principle in soil conservation.
"At present, I am teacher in the Workers' Education in Cedar Creek Community." Handing me a. bulletin, "This will show you something of the nature of the work."
Glancing through it, I saw lesson plans, research questions, and so forth.
"You will notice at the end that the name of Doctor William Jones, of Clemson, is along with nine, as one of the authors. All he did was to copy three paragraphs from another bulletin; the rest is my work.
"My farm work is done by a darkey that I've had here on the place for sixteen years. I pay him a dollar a day. If it wasn't that he has been with me so long, I wouldn't give him that much. This year we made only three bales of cotton, but enough corn and forage for use on the place.
"In short, I have spent most of my life for others. I have lived to help other people. In church and in the schools of the county, I have done all I could to advance church work and education by cooperating with others. Whether with or without compensation, I work right on. I have been trustee of the public school of this district for half of my life. Have served as steward of the church, secretary of the farmers' union, chaplain of the grange, and president and director of the local farm association.
"I have never been in a legal dispute, arrested or prosecuted for any offense. I won't say I haven't been persecuted.
"I prefer hard struggles in my home community to city life.
"I am a one hundred percent democrat - woof, warp, and filling.
"I enjoy community recreation and country picnics. At socials, I am first on the floor for folk dance.
"You should see our community recreation hall. The neighborhood contributed $700, and the W.P.A. labor did the work. We are going to build a storage house next week for the community hall.
"The burning of our home hit us very heavy. The $400 insurance didn't go far towards rebuilding. Besides, we lost everything in it. All my library and records, books I had collected from boyhood up.
"My children are helping me build it back. Each is building a room for himself as a home. We do the work as we can. Claude and Arthur work faithfully on it during their vacations. Though three years have passed, and it's not completed, we hope to have the best that can be found in these hard hills.
"Let me show you what we have so far."
The three rooms that were built soon after the old home was burned, and are now being used as a living room, kitchen, and bedroom, join the main building to one side and about the center. The living room is heated by an open fireplace and is furnished by a big round canter table and chairs. On the wall near the door was a telephone. By the side of the fireplace were several shelves filled with books.
From here we went out into a screened side porch and entered the kitchen, adjoining to the right. This was wall lighted by three windows. A new range was on one side, a sink under a window, and an enameled metal cook table in one corner.
"If you have never had your house burned, you don't know what a struggle it is to have to build, and buy furniture for the household. But we have never lost faith, and we are beginning to see the light that leads out. Bow I will show you through the main building."
We entered a hallway some eight feet wide and extending back to the chimney. From here a stairway led up to the second floor. While we were going up the stops, we stopped and looked down at the chimney. Mr. Oliver remarked: "I don't suppose you have ever seen a chimney like that before. I haven't either. There are about 6,000 brick in it. The base is seven by eight feet, extending, as you see, to the ceiling of this hallway. In order to have fireplaces in rooms on both sides of the hallway we had to make it the width of the hall. This arrangement also Mikes space for the stairway."
Mr. Oliver took the lead as we continued up the stairway into the hallway which extends across the width of the building.
"This is Lillian's room. All, you will notice, are not completely furnished. We have to crawl before we can walk," explained Mr. Oliver.
This room was ceiled, walls and overhead, as are the others on the second floor. The natural color of the yellow pine is brought out by a coating of shellac. The four large windows wore tastefully curtained with light cretonne. The improvised washstand, made of apple boxes and draped with same material as curtains, was very convenient end attractive. The bed was of white enameled iron, with white counterpane orderly spread.
Going to the next room on the same side of the hall, Mr. Oliver said: "In here is the old maid's quarters. (Meaning Arthur, who has never married.) This is where he sleeps, and there, across the hall, is his study."
In the bedroom were an old walnut bed, which was used by his grandfather, and a trunk. The study was a well lighted room of some ten by twenty feet with white painted walls. Here were books galore; some were arranged in shelves and many stacked in piles on the floor. By the window were a typewriter, chair, and table.
Going back into the hall and down to the opposite end, we entered Claude's room. This was some larger than the others, about eighteen by sixteen feet, and furnished with an iron bed, small oak table, and two straight split bottom chairs.
Retracing our steps downstairs, Mr. Oliver stopped at the foot of the stairway and, pointing to the left, said, "This will be the bathroom, when we get the fixtures put in and the water out on." Going directly across the hall, we entered the living room, about fifteen by thirty feet in dimensions and not yet finished.
"This will be the dance hall," said Mr. Oliver." And pointing to the present living quarters, "That is the 'sylum."
Arthur, who had joined us, explained: "He means the asylum, hospital for the insane. He likes to have his fun."
We passed through a narrow hallway separated from the stairway hall by the double chimney and entered another room.
"This," said Mr. Oliver, in his humorous way, "will be the most expensive room in the house; that is, after we begin to use it. It is to be the dining room. Here to our right is the fireplace I referred to a while ago. The flue goes into the big chimney. We have yet to floor end ceil the room before it will be ready for use. We hope to do this next summer when the boys are here on their vacations.
"As soon as we are able, we expect to have the house wired for lights. After three years of hard work trying to get the rural electric line extended into our community, we hope now in a short time to begin the construction. I am going to Blythewood this afternoon to see if the material has come."
SOUTH CAROLINA WRITERS'PROJECT
LIFE HISTORY
TITLE:
BETTER A TENT THAN A MORTGAGE
Date of First Writing	February 28, 1939
Name of Person Interviewed	W. D. Strange (white)
Fictitious Name	Walter Strother
Street Address	None
Place	Route 1, Lykesland, S. C.
Occupation	Farmer
Name of Writer	L. E. Cogburn
Name of Reviser	State Office
The cold February wind swept across the fields and through the wide open spaces. Only here end there could a tree be seen; for the woods long ego had given place to broad cottonfields. This was eight miles east of Columbia, South Carolina, off the Leesburg road. I had made a trip especially for the purpose of geining an interview with Mr. Walter Strother, to gather facts for his life story.
There was no Indication of life about the place. No smoke was coming from the chimney, which is almost ensure sign on a cold day like this that no one was at home.
I didn't want to miss seeing Mr. Strother. I knocked it the front entrance of his three-room log cottage. He opened the door, gazing for a moment in wonderment. Then, extending a rough toil-worn hand, he said: "You'd better step inside out of this cold wind."
" I don't believe you remember me, Mr. Strother," I remarked, as I stepped into the hallway.
He replied: "Yes, let me see. It was about three years ago that you were here and advised me about my terracing."
"You have a good memory, Mr. Strother. Did the changes in the terraces I suggested remedy the soil washing?"
"I had no more breaks. I have just finished with my annual work with terraces."
Opening the door of the combination living room and bedroom, Mr. Strother invited me to enter and have a seat. Then he said: "I had just come in and started to build a fire. There hasn't been any made since early this morning. I'll have to go get some more wood."
The few minutes he was out, I observed the room and its furnishings. In one corner stood a new mahogany-finished, four-poster bed, neatly spread with a purple counterpane. By the email front window was a sewing machine, and under the window by the fireplace set a box for wood. Against the north wall stood a dresser, and in a corner a small table. A rocker and several straight chairs circled in front of the fireplace. A bright-colored, new linoleum square covered moat of the floor. The walls were ceiled with undressed pine boards, which were partly covered with large sections of cardboard. The hewn four-by-six joists were plainly visible. They were, however, covered with boards laid crosswise on top of them.
My host, having built a good fire, said; "Drew up the rocker and have a seat here near me."
"Mr. Strother, I decided this would be a splendid day for finding yon at home. I wanted so much to talk to you again that I braved this wind in order to have just such a luxury as this good wood fire and rocking chair while we talked. You see, I as sort of a writing fellow, and I want to write something about your life. I know you must have some very interesting things to tall me."
Leaning forward, with his finger tips pressing on his brow, Walter Strother began:
"I was born on the Wateree River fifty years ago, and lived there until I was six years old. My father then moved to Derrick's Pond, about seventeen miles southeast of Columbia. The next year, when I was just seven years old, my father left us. I am the oldest of his family of seven children.
"In order to help my mother support our family, I had to plow in the fields at the age of eight years. I became a regular plowhand by the time I was ten. Mr. kerningham, on whose place we lived, hired me by the day, at a wage of forty cents a day. We earned so little that my mother could afford to buy only the bare necessities. There were days that we had to go hungry. I, in the meantime, had received but a few months of schooling. I didn't have time to go to school. I had to work.
"When I was twelve years old, and my brothers were large enough to help, I asked Mr. Kerningham to let us work a sharecrop. I felt that this would afford us more to eat, because of an advance on a sharecrop.
"I'll never forget the morning I went to Mr. Kerningham and asked him for a sharecrop. He was fixing to go to Columbia. Already had his horse hitched to the buggy. He said to me, 'Son, you can't manage a farm.' I looked at him square in the face end said, 'Give me a chance.' He told me he would think it over, and for me to come back in a few days. I didn't wait. I went back the next day, and he said, 'Walter, I have decided to do it. When do you want to move?' 'Right away,' I told him. 'Go and catch Kit and Book end hitch them to the wagon end move,' he told me.
"That year, I made seven bales of cotton end plenty of corn, peas, and potatoes. And we didn't have to go hungry at any time.
"Mr. Kerningham used the lien system to run his farm. He traded with Mr. E. C. Shull, who ran a big grocery store in Columbia on Main Street, between Taylor and Blanding.
"That fall, after we started to pick cotton, I went to Mr. Kerningham and said, 'I have a bale of cotton out.'
"'You know you haven't a bale already,' he replied.
"'Yes, I have, too.'
"'When do you want to gin it? It's bringing a little more than eight cents now.'
"'I'll do as you say. You know best.'
" 'Suppose you gin it tomorrow,' he said.
"He had a gin on the place, and the next day I had it ginned. I went to Mr. Kerningham and said, 'I want you to sell it for me.'
" 'No, you take the wagon end haul it to Columbia and sell. I'll meet you at the store.'
"I tied my mules to the hitching post on Assembly Street. I remembered how my father did when he sold cotton. A cut the side of each bale and pulled a sample end took it to the buyer and asked him what he would bid on it. Taking the samples and examining them, he said, 'I'll give you eight cents. Might give you more after I see the bales. Where are they?' We went to the wagon, and he pulled a sample from each bale. After examining it, he said: 'I'll give you eight and a half, if you'll sell it now and not try to get a higher bidder.'
"I sold it to him and took the check to the store and mot Mr. Kerning- ham. He said to me, 'Have you sold your cotton?'
"'Yes, sir, I replied. And at the same time I handed him the check.
"'What did you get for it?' he asked.
"'Eight and a half cents a pound.'
"'That's good.'
"We walked to the back end of the store. He sat down on a bag of oats, and I sat on, -- I don't remember what. I didn't know much 'rithmetic, but I had already counted up what was to come to me. He was dividing it up, after taking off the cost of bagging and ties and ginning. He said to me, 'You have so-and-so for your part. How much do you want?'
"'Not a dime.'
"'You don't want any at all?'
"'No, sir. Put it to my credit on my account,' I told him.
"I furnished the labor and paid for half the fertilizer, and he furnished and fed the stock and paid for half the fertilizer. We divided everything that was made half-and-half, except the potatoes. I had all of these that I made.
"I worked this way two years with Mr. Kerningham. Saw that he was getting the best of it, as I thought then. But there wasn't the slightest misunderstanding between us.
"The next year, I moved away from him and rented. I bought a plug mule and got one of those liens. Had a bed crop year, and didn't make enough to pay the rent and lien. I took the mile back to the man I bought it from. Ho didn't have to come for it. I explained to him that I had nothing to pay, and he was mighty nice about it. Took the mule back and didn't blame me.
"I sold everything to settle up and was left flat again, like the first time I went to the old man.
"I found out that I made a mistake when I left Mr. Kerningham. I went back and asked him for a crop again, and he gave it to me. I was a pretty big boy then, whole lot of difference from the first time.
"This year I made a good crop, got a fair price for it, and cleared a little money. I was determined to do something.
"By this time, my brothers and sisters had left us. There was no one at home now but Mother and myself.
"Old Mrs. Rast had been to see me about renting her place and coming to live in the house with her. She was living alone in a large house and wanted a family, without children, for company.
"I went to Mr. Kerningham and told him I was thinking of renting Mrs. Rast's place, and asked him to watch me and see how I came along with it.
"I bought another mule, and paid for it this time. I had plenty of corn, forage, and meat to carry me through the year.
" I rented from Mrs. Rast and stayed there thirteen years. We got along fine living in the house with her. We thought a lot of her, and she liked us.
"Times were better now, end it did not take much for my mother and me to live on. I saved a little mohey every year after my obligations were met. I sold my old plug mule and bought a better one, so I could work more acres.
"My sisters, five of them, were all married and raising families. They were constantly sending for Mama to stay with them weeks at a time. When she was away, I had double duty. I'd come in at night too tired to have to fry eggs and make coffee. But it was up to me to cook supper or go to bed hungry. I got awful tired of baching it, and, besides, I didn't have time to cook any vegetables for dinner. So I had indigestion and got as cross as an old settin' hen.
"Well, the only thing I had to do was to find me a cook, but where? It seemed to me all the good ones were married or cooking for somebody else, or they were so old and ugly I didn't want to have to look at them across the table three times every day. But about this time, Mr. Altman, of Columbia, bought a little place over there right next to mine. He gave one of his sons a mule and put him to farming. His sister would come out every now and then to keep house for him. It would fall to my lot to take her back home occasionally. That thing happened for two years. And then one day, when I was taking her home, I told her I knew how good she was to her brother, and I knew she would be good to me. She laughed and said that she didn't know about that. But I wasn't going to be outdone, so I wrote her a letter, telling her how much I loved her and needed her. And the next week, she wrote and said she had thought it over seriously and had decided to accept my proposal and become my wife. I tell you I was glad. So we decided on the day, and I took her over to the preacher, got the knot tied, and brought her home with me.
"I had always wanted a home of my own. I began to figure on the rent I was paying. During the thirteen years I was renting, I had paid fifty dollars an acre and hadn't a home yet.
"This was in 1918, when everything was at the peak. Land was away up. In the meantime, Mrs. Rast had died, and her place was for sale. I wanted to buy it, but the heirs wanted cash payment. I didn't have enough to pay all done.
"I looked around and investigated several places, and this one I am living on now was the best I could get. I bought it and made the first payment twenty-one years ago. By working hard and saving, doing without things we would have enjoyed, I finished paying for it in five years.
"Right here I raised my family of four boys and one girl. One boy is in the ninth grade of high school now. The others finished high school. I was not able to send any of them to college. One of the boys is at Knoxville, Tennessee, with the Boone Transfer Company. Another one is manager of the A & P Store at Kingstree, South Carolina. He is married and visits us every few weeks. The other boy has been working but hasn't a job at present. He thinks he will have one soon. The girl is in training at the State Hospital.
"It would be hard to estimate the cost of medicine, doctors' bills, and hospital bills I have had in raising my family.
"The boy that's in high school now was taken ill suddenly about four years ago. He fell unconscious on the floor out there in the hall. When I got to him, he wag as limp as a rag. We took him to a country doctor, being the quickest one I could reach. He examined him and said he didn't know what was the matter with him, but told me to carry him to the hospital at once.
"After the examination at the hospital, I was told that he had infantile paralysis. They worked with him for days and days, and he became weaker and weaker. His breathing and pulse were low. One night there were several doctors around his bed looking down at him. I was standing out in the hall and could see them through the partly closed door. I knew the situation; they didn't have to tell me. But I asked my doctor as he came out: 'Doctor, how is my boy?'
"He said, 'He can't live through the night.'
"I said, 'Doctor, will it be throwing and fat in the fire for me to get another doctor?'
"We shall gladly welcome any help from any source. We have done all we can do,' was his reply.
"I called Dr. Snow and explained the situation. In a short time he was with my boy, and the first thing he did for him was to put a cold pack on his head. It wasn't long before he was breathing better, and by morning he seemed to be coming back. The doctor told me now he thought the boy would live, but one aide of his body was dead," indicating, with a stroke of his hand, from his nose down the middle of his body.
"After they kept him at the hospital for nearly three months, we brought him home. His mind was gone, and he had very little use of himself. We cared for him the best we could, rubbing and bathing him, and gradually he improved. Now he is passing his work at school. His body is normal, except he can't use his right hand.
"I don't believe we would have him with us today had it not been for the treatment he got at the hospital. But I can't help but feel they were a little hard on me in charging. I've paid most of the bill, the beat I've been able to do.
"I am not a Christian nor a member of the church. I know I haven't lived as I should have. But I go to church and Sunday School and pay my preacher. I treat my fellowman right."
"Didn't you lose a boy at school when the tornado - - - ?" Noticing his countenance, that he was profoundly moved, I said, "Pardon mo, please, I shouldn't have mentioned it."
Weeping and suppressing his sobs, he pulled himself together, saying: "I didn't want to remember it. That was the worst thing I've ever had to happen to me. Word came to me of the wreck of the school building. I went over there and pulled my boy out from under the building. . ." Hesitatingly and sorrowfully, he continued: "All the other children, I was able to do something for." After a lapse of about ten seconds: "That, I believe, was about fifteen years ago."
"I know it must have been hard for you, but it takes such grit and courage as you have to overcome it," I remarked, hoping to give him some encouragement.
Now, having gained complete control of his emotions, he reverted his attention paying: "I'm up in the morning at five, and I go all day, working till late. Since the W.P.A. has been operating, labor has been so high that I couldn't afford to hire any help with the farm work, and I've been doing it myself,
"My wife has been working in the sewing room of the W.P.A., off and on, mostly off. Sometime ago, they told her that since we own our farm she would have to quit. I am not sorry of it either, for she would work over there until she'd make herself sick, and I would have to carry her to the doctor. As it is now, she is of more help to me.
"This place has some more than a hundred acres. I don't try to run more than a one-horse farm. Last year I planted seven acres in cotton and made only one bale. I used poison, too. But the boll <text not clear> eat up the cotton in spite of it. The fertilizer cost me one hundred dollars. I sold the cotton for fifty-two dollars. The loss on the fertilizer alone was forty-eight dollars, not counting the work and the other expense. I had to sell something else to finish paying for the fertilizer. I am through with cotton. It costs around eight and nine cents to raise it. It would have paid mo far better to have planted potatoes, even if I hadn't made but two bushels, that would've been clear.
"I made plenty of corn and forage and two banks of potatoes, about seventy-five bushels. I plant velvet beans in the corn. That is fine for building up land and good for stock. I don't have to gather it, just let it stay in the field and turn the stock in on it. The longer it stays, the better they like it.
"We raise our own meat and flour. I always try to keep a good milk cow, and we have plenty of milk and butter. He have a hundred white leghorn and barred rock hens. We sell the eggs and have all the chickens and eggs we want for our own use.
"We've never had but one case in court, and that was in the magistrate's court. I wasn't twelve years old.
"We had a day out picking cotton for a neighbor. We started picking on one end of a large field, with rows seven or eight acres long. We were picking along near the middle of the length of the rows, before I had noticed a crowd picking from the other end and meeting us. One of the boys stood up and hollered out: 'If Walter Strother is here, you'd better watch your pile or you won't have any cotton.' When he said that, I pulled off my cotton sack and ran toward him. And he was coming for ems. He was fully as large as I was, and we would've been well matched for a good tussle. But when I got near him, a big shining blade of a knife in his hand caught my eye. I hesitated just a second, and then I kicked him and hit him with my fist at the same time, knocking him down. I jumped on top of him, took his knife away from him, shut it up and put it in my pocket. Then I gave him a good beating.
"At the trial, two days afterwards, he had a big knot on the back of his neck. The boy's father had me tried for assault and battery. After the boy had testified, the judge said: 'Now, Strother, let's have your side of it.' I told him how it took place, and he asked me: 'Have you got that knife in your pocket?' I answered, 'Yes, sir,' and handed it to him. He took it and, holding it up, asked the boy, 'Is this your knife?'
"'Yes sir,' the boy told the judge.
""Tell me why Strother has it.'
"Hesitating somewhat, he said: 'He took it away from me.'
"Then the judge turned to the boy's father and said: 'I think you have the boot on the wrong foot.'"
"I know I've made it hard for myself. That old truck out there in the yard is what we use when we go anywhere. It takes just as much, if not more, gas and oil than a new car would use. I could go to Columbia today and drive home a new car. Buy it on credit, too. I believe I could go to Mr. Kerningham any time I wish and borrow $1,000 in cash. And he'd more than likely have that much on hand. If he didn't, he'd write me a check.
"We'd like very much to build us a new house to live in, but I'll stay on in this one. And, if necessary, I'll buy me a tent and put it up out there in the yard before I'd give a mortgage on my home to get the money. I could sell a calf and buy a tent to live in.
"Hesitating, and apparently serious, as if weighing a matter of great importance, he said: "I don't know what might happen. Of course, I'm not counting on dying soon, but you know a man of my age is more likely to die than when I was much younger.
"I want to leave this place for my children, when my wife and I are gone. I want to fix the title so that they can't sell it and run through with the money and not have a home to go to. I know what it means to not have a home.