Jerry Coleman
530 S. Galvez St.
Interviewed 5/15,17,19/39
Submitted 5/19/39
"PEDDLIN’ JERRY."
"They calls me peddlin’ Jerry. Mister, I been peddlin' all my days. They ought or call me hard peddlin' Jerry, cause I peddlin’ hard," contended Jerry Coleman after his day's work on one of Bertucci's wagon, preparing himself to "hit the streets and have some fun" in his one room in the rear of a double cottage house.
Jerry's room is unsanitary and shamefully untidy. He sleeps on a cot and eats on a chair. "Most of my food is borrowed food," Jerry explains without any hestitancy to alibi, "You see, I can't-cook for myself. So, I gets me an old woman to cook for me. I gives her fruits and vegetables and we work it together like that."
Jerry Coleman is a hard man to see; he is always busy doing nothing. He is short black man, age 43. His hair is knappy and his complexion is rough. Jerry is a murderer, having killed a man ten years ago over a nickel. Jerry doesn't ever think about that. In fact, "what is there to think about? The nigger is dead, aint he?”.
"When my life started? Well, thats hard to tell. I think it started when I was twelve years old. I ran away from my ma and went up to Saint Louis. Hoboed around and found a job making fifteen dollars a week. But I got in trouble and stabbed a fellow. Imaint no bad man but I don't beleive in taking nothing off nobody. Well, I had to jump Saint Louis. The dicks got after me, and I wasn't going to jail in Saint Louis. I don't mind going to jail here but not in Saint Louis. I can get to be a stick man here cause I know the warden. When I go to jail the warden says, 'Well, look or here, here's old Peddlin' Jerry again. Get a stick and see that these niggers do right.
"I don't know nothing about my ma and pa. I left them and I aint seen them since. My cousin is always saying I was a holloring baby. Must lungs must be good cause I sure can hollor. Peddlin' is the only kind of work I can do, its the only kind I want to do. I'd rather peddle than to work on the W.P.A. any day. I just don't think a man ought to take the governments/money like that. It aint right, thats all. Any man can make money if he tries. The trouble with people is they don't try, thats all. I make it. I made it in the depression time and I sure can make it now. Its just a matter of hustling, thats all.
"I even gamble. Man, I'm telling you if I could hold on to my money I'd do all right. I'm going get me some insurance one of these' days, cause I'm getting kind of old. I may not look like it but I’m forty-three. I aint just come here, I been here. Sometimes I look at my life and I wonder, I say, Jerry, you done been here a long time and you done been in a heap of trouble. Thats when I feel like joining church. No, I don't belong to no church. As for as I remember My pa, Sammy Coleman, was on the Starlight Baptist Church board. He was a big shot in the church, but I was so full of devilment I aint paid no tention to church.
"Well, I always did gamble. That was my line. I used to be a pimp too, but I had to beat up money so I gave that up, cause I didn't want to kill no woman. I started off giving them my money to get their's then they get hanty and fore I kjow it they is getting funny and I knock 'um on their ass. To tell you the truth, I can't remember much about myself. What have you done? All I know is that I've raised hell.
"Sometimes I'm sorry I killed Jake but I had to. I'll tell you how it happened. We was playing cards and Jake was sitting in on the game watching. Well, an argument comes up and Jake gets in it. I says what is you got to do with it. He says, ‘I got plenty to do with it. I pulls out my knife and I started to let him have it, but I figures he might have a knife so I better wait. I aint said no more. He says, ‘You black bastard, when you get so you can scare me I want to know about it.' I aint said nothing, he continues talking his big talk. That bastard aint knowed I was figuring on killing him, he just went on bragging about what he’d do. Thats why I always says do what you got to do and then brags. Don't never talk too much cause while you is talking somebody might be thinking about killing you, or knocking your head off. Well, everybody said you going to let him get off with that Jerry. I aint said nothing, I just wen home and got my gun. I took a drink and asked him to come outside cause I didn't want to start no bug in the place. I had done made up my mind to shoot out with him. I said you sonofabitch, If you aint got no pistol you need one. He says, 'you aint got nerve enough to shoot' and outs with his knife. Then, I cracked down on him and he hit the floor. No, I wasn't sorry. He was just as a dead nigger, thats all. Sure, I went to jail. Gave myself up. I got sentenaced too. Went to Angola and got to be stick man. Had it easy. White folks don't care nothing about niggers killing each other. I was out of there in seven years. Came on right back here, and I almost had to kill his brother. Shot at him ten times. Loaded my gun, and reloaded it. Well, here's what happened: When I came out his brother Joe went around telling people what he was going to do to me. So, I just made up my mind to give him some lead. We met on Felivity and Howard. I aint said nothing to him and he aint said nothing to me. He just looked at me and I looked at him. Then somebody says knock that bastard on his ass Joe. And Joe started at me, thats where I outs with my thirty-eight and heated up the place, had gunfire stirring up the place. Niggers was running which a-way and that a-way. The man who own the joint ran around the corner. The police came and I threw away the gun. Went over to the Twelth and the police started beating me. Captain Delholm came in and stopped them. I got three months for that. Mr. Bertucci got me on the gang and I got two for one and I was out in a while.
"Don't get me wrong. I aint no bad man, I just aint going to stand for foolishness. See? Say man, I hit a woman on a stairway and knocked down two flights of stairs. Why did I hit her? She messed with me, thats why. You see, I been laying my stuff down to this twiff and she gave my stuff to somebody else. I asked her about it and she gave me a fly answer. Down the stairs she went, a-boom. Her sweetheart was there and that nigger jumped out the window, a-boom. I aint done nothing but laughed. It was sure funny. He says, 'Lord, its peddlin' Jerry. Did he run!
"Take the other day, I went up Thalia Street and met a fellow who owes me a dollar. I says what about my dollar. He says, take it easy. I'm going to pay you.' I says pay me now, you been owing me nearly a year. He says you’re a lie. Man, I ups with my gat and started to let him have it. He came up with five dollars. I didn't/take the five dollar bill, I gave him four dollars change. Told him not to never let that happen again. No, aint no white folks done made me mad. My gun aint got no segregation sign on it, anybody goes when the wagon comes. I don’t beleive in picking no fuss and I don't beleive in doing no arguing. If somebody makes me mad I’m going to shoot and then talk.
"There is something I wouldn't do for nothing in the world, steal and kick a woman. My pa kicked my ma and she hearly died. And I figures a man can do without stealing anyday. You’ll never see where I went to jail for stealing. I can't stand a man who steals. Everytime I hear of a man stealing I tell the police. Thats why they say I get out of trouble. Thats why they say I'm in with the police, but I aint in with ‘em.
"I like to sit down and talk with you. I'm sorry I wasn't home. Come back and talk with me again. No, I don't use nothing but whiskey. I can't go dope. I done triedm used to smoke weeds. I have some friends who like 'em. Want to blow? No? Cause if you want to I can fix you up!”
The Suzy Q Barroom
S. Rampart & Thalia Sts.
December 23, 1938
McKinney-1
MARY DAVIS
Mary Davis is a combination cook and maid in a white assignation house on Baronne Street, where she has been employed four years. She professes to know every angle of her job, which is "to cook, wait on the ladies and make the mens comfortable." There is big money in the latter, thats why Mary says she wouldn't swap jobs for nothing in the world. "My salary is ten dollars a week but I knows my stuff so I make plenty tips," contends this chocolate brown girl who is only twenty-two years old, and who, despite the puffy pouches under her alert eyes and the wrinkles on her face, is very attractive. She is about five feet, two inches tall and weighs one hundred and eighteen pounds. Her legs are shapely and her waist is trimmed to a "natchel figure," as Mary puts it. She walks proudly, almost vulgarly, making quick, short steps to shake her hips.
Mary was doing some fancy walking up South Rampart Street...keeping time with the hubbub and beat of the noisy Street, which was full of Christmas spirit...when we saw her. She was a spectacle to see, wearing green house slippers, a tight short black dress that had ruffles around her posterior and just above her waist; she also wore a red comb in her wild, knappy hair and a pair of red stockings that had arrows above her ankles. Mary was bowing and giving her "howdy" to greet her kind, slow-walking pimps who were whistling weird blue songs, and frustrated whores whose baffled eyes depict the life they lead. "What you say, Black gal!" "Shake babe."
"Howdy Pete, whar is you goin?" "Look, she's dressed to kill."
"Take it easy babes. “ "Lawd, today!”
When we bumped into Mary she wasn't really in the mood for any talk, she changed her gait, stopping suddenly to flippantly "kick off:" "If you aint goin' to spend no money don't stop me big boy."Mary's words were choppy but positive, she shook her head as to say thats right. She was enjoying an off-day and was out to have some fun or make some money, she preferred making some money. "Yes, daddy What I wants you aint got...so be on your merry way." We hesitated. "What you say Gate?" She was talking to another fellow now but hadn't moved from us, probably waiting for our decision. We offered a drink in a nearby barroom, the Suzy Q. After some deliberation with herself, Mary indifferently accepted our treat.
This happy girl was the center of attraction as she arrogantly walked into the lowly Suzy Q...a hole-in-the-wall "joint" where dope fiends, murderers and theives rub elbows and other/things with each other and thirty-five cents whores whose grip on life was lost long ago. Mary's presence caused, among other things, the onlookers..a bunch of bums who were hungry looking...to cease their babblement. Everybody looked at Mary with awe, even the boss, a big mouthed, clumsy Italian who looked like a dope peddler of some repute. He played several songs on his Music Box which influenced about six couples to dance. Where some of the women came from we do not know, but they came...all to see Mary Davis and her "dude.” Mary knew she was the cause of all this fuss, so she very loudly ordered a drink. "A pint of Murray Hill for me and my daddy, eh daddy?" Well, this was slightly unexpected, and was taking too much for granted. So, we suggested that Mary call us Jake but it didn't work, and we were afraid, frankly. Because if Mary's pimp had come along and caught her being so familiar with us there would have been trouble in the Suzy Q, serious trouble. We would have landed in the Charity Hospital. Maybe that is why the Italian was a little nervous. Anyway, the music went on. They played the Weary Blues six times. The dancing was low-down and dirty. The men, with their hats and caps pulled over their eyes, and the women, with their dresses half raised, were shaking their bellies against each other. They would stoop over to twist their rumps, which made their legs bend over like frogs. Some of them were giggling, but the majority were talking deep talk into each other's ears. Everybody was having a grand time, but us. We had work to do and were caught wondering when was the best time to get started.
Finally, Mary said something about herself but didn't say it loud enough; she wanted to peruse the dancing fools from our little blue table in the rear of the "joint." Mary was drinking/whiskey while we drank coca cola. Lucky for us she noticed our nervousness upon receiving her third highball. "Your kind don't come around here much, big boy," she offered. And all of a sudden she liked us. "But I like you…I go for you babes." Her arms were around our neck and her dim eyes were looking squarely into our's. But Mary wasn't drunk, she was playing with us, hoping to make that money she wanted.
It was startling to watch Mary's eyes change every time she was dissapointed, every time we declined to accept her invitation to a side room. Her eyes would give up but shortly come back again as to say "I'll get you yet." Because her conception of fun didn't please us, Mary surprisingly started, "Now if you want some real fun and you got about five dollars to spend....” That statement was never completed. What Mary intended to say we could not find out, she changed her mind all of a sudden. "Is you goin' to buy another drink or what you goin do?" She asked. Her cold hands ran across our legs and she leaned her body on us, it was hot. Mary/wasn't talking, she was hoping. "You is my kind of man, daddy." Somebody played Boogey woogey by Tommy Dorsey and his orchestra and we danced. Mary shook her nimble body nicely, keeping time with every drum beat of the band and showing the other women how to do the kind of stuff they were trying. Mary's stomach started rolling like a top, it was looping. She was popping her fingers and flipping her hips in glee. Mary's giggles were loud and painful to us, she was attracting too much attention.
When the dancing was completed, we moved back to our same blue table. Mary sneeked her soft hands under the table and felt us; her eyes were blinking, she was trying to be cute, talking baby talk. "Listen my da-da-dy. I be around white folks too much to try and pull anything funny on you...don't worry about that. We will have a good time." She contended, yet feeling us. To keep Mary interested we had to play blue songs and make over her dancing, drawing the attention of those mean-looking bums.
But, finally, we had Mary talking about herself. She told us she was from Saint Louis. When we called the names of a few women who are living in Mary's home town she dropped her effort to win our love or get our money, and fell into our trap. Yes, all of that was necessary to have Mary Davis give us what is here as her Life History. It was told in the Suzy Q and at a little blue table that wobbled every. time we leaned on it. Unfortunately, Mary wouldn't tell all. She is a hard nut to crack.
"I was born in Saint Louis...the blues town. My mother is named Martha Davis and my father is named Joseph Davis. They is Christian people but look at me....who's me? Anyway, I like my life. No, I aint never been married...for what? Then my fun will stop. Do I like children..sure. Who doesn't? No indeed, I dont like them well enough to have, not right now. I aint got no time to be bothered with children. So you Ruth Wilkins and Jerry Williams..boy, them two gals has got Saint Louis by the ass hole and they is dragging it around. Thelma Jones....do you know her?...has one of best making money houses in Saint Louis. Don't you know Louis Abey? He's from here…he's her man.
"I'll tell you why I left home. My people didn't was t me to go no where..to do nothing or nothing. I didn't have no fun at all from five to fourteen, didn’t know what life was. I hadn't been no where or seen nothing. My people wanted me to be too good...don't guess I had no good in my soul though. Cause I wanted men when I was ten years..but I didn't have none though, was scared. Me and the girl next door to me used to git lil bit, but that aint done nothing but make me want a man, thats all. Shucks, I played hookey from school like little boys so me and my girl friend could sneak to her house and do-it. Yes, I finished grammar school, but my father took sick. .I sho was glad when my mamma asked me to look for a job one summer so I could help her. I was fifteen years old then. Shucks, it aint took me no time atall to find a job...went right on down to Smith's Restuarant and he put me on. Then he started running after me. I told my girl friend and she told me to ask him for five dollars. That I did. But man, man that damn fool nearly killed me...I said never no more. Shucks, from them on I let my girl friend screw me..it was good. I made up my mind to never let a man screw me again.
"Well, after that summer my father got better and my mamma wanted me to go back to school. I was some mad, me and my girl friend. But we went back, didn't learn nothing though..aint had no studying on my mind. Man. I told my mamma that and she nearly killed me. I don't never want another beating like that as long as I live..no indeed! Well, we messed around and messed around, me and my girl friend until school was out. Then I asked my mamma if she wanted me to work and help along like I did last summer. She said yes. I said to myself here is where I get a chance to quit school for good. I went on back to Smith's Restuarant and ask him for a job, but I told him infront that I was going to screw him..he was too big. He said alright. He gave me the job..everything went find. Me and my girl friend was still good, screwing every night after our work. I made good money, used to give my mamma and pappa as high as six fifty every week.
"Man, jest like I'm telling you..one night when I was getting ready to go Smith came up behind me. There wasn't a soul in the store. He said, 'Mary, here is five dollars extra for you.” Well, I was r young and foolish..I didn't know. I took the money and started to leave. But he grab me by the arm and says, 'Mary, I know a better way. It want hurt you.’ I says what kind of way is that? He says, 'take this ten dollar bill. If I hurt you keep the bill, if I don't hurt you give me my money back. That sound like a fair proposition so I agreed to it. Man, Smith laid me on the floor and knelt down over me and commenced kissing me on the stomach, licking my titties and kissing me all over...aint nothing hurt me, so I aint said nothing. He says, 'Mary, close your eyes.' I did that..and man, b'fore long I felt his tongue in me. Ghee! It was good! He says, 'Mary, does it hurt?’ I says no indeed. He says give it to me baby, and I started coming. That turned me out...aint wanted nothing but that..had my girl friend doing it and all the men...just a few of them went with me. Sucking was better than fucking anyday. Man, I started making money. When my mamma asked me where I got so much money from I told her I made it in tips..till one day she caught me in a lie. I came home with eighty-two dollars, she counted every cent. My papa nearly died, he was talking about putting me in jail, but he didn't. They went on down to the Restuarant and asked Smith..he saved me, told them that a man made a mistake and gave me all of that money. My mamma kept the money and told Smith when he came back to send him to her and that she would give it to him...that she couldn't trust me with that kind of money, but mamma didn't know. She kept the money and kept the money, one day I says give the money, to Smith..he'll take good care of it. And do you know that mamma was fool enough to give that whole eighty-two dollars to Smith?
"I was doing all right. I started cooking... jive cooking for Smith. He paid me twenty-five dollars a week. He quit his old lady and told mamma he wanted to marry me. Mamma says he was too old..Smith was thirty-five and jet black. I beleives that is why mamma didn't want me to marry him, anyway I did. I ran away from home. It nearly killed my papa. You see, I'm the only child. No matter how much money I would send them they was not happy. I didn't know what to do. I was living good but my folks wasn't. I was really unhappy. What happened to my girl friend? Thats what I want to tell you about. She used to write me every week and send me money...sometime as much as ten dollars. She was living in Memphis...making plenty of money. She begged me come to Memphis....I aint never been no place so I wanted to go for the trip. Smith wouldn't let me go...said if I went to Memphis or anyother place He’d quit me..and wouldn't give me a cent. That was his talk all of the time. It got on my nerves too. Just to show that Nigger that he wasn't smart I went downtown to see a lawyer. He ask me if we was legally married. I told him yes. Then he asked me if my husband had any money. I told yes. He got to checking on Smith and told me to rest easy. Man, one day....order some more to drink. Man, one day the lawyer..his name was Mr. Easter....called me up and ask me to come down to his office right away. I knew it must er been something special when he told his secretary to let me in his private office...I got to figuring too. I says to myself I wonder if this man wants some of my pussy. I went into his office and sat me before him in one of them big easy chairs and he pulled me closer. I was scared...cause I aint never had nothing to do with no white man then. Cose, I heard about them...tell me they really turned aloose their dough. So, I wished he’s ask me for some.
"Shucks, that lawyer aint had pussy on his mind. He had business on his mind. He told me like this: 'Your husband is an ex-convict but there aint many people who knows it..he aint from here. He's from Florida. Tell you want to make a settlement for three thousand dollars….that your lawyer says so. And if he talks smart talk, tell him that your lawyer says he'll have him back in penitentiary. But don't you take the money. Tell him to bring the money to me. Tell him he don't need no lawyer, what he needs is to git stratght with us. I says yes sir. And I went right smack to Smith and told him what the lawyer says. Man, you should er seen that black nigger turning white...I heard a black man can turn white and that time I found out its true. If he didn't turn white little apples! I talked straight, jest like the lawyer told me to talk. Smith says he aint had no three thousand dollars...that he had fifteen hundred. Told me he would sell his business. How that Lawyer found out that Smith had run away from from the jail. In Florida I don't know, but he found out! Well, I went back to the lawyer and we talked and talked. I told him that Smith aint had no three thousand dollars but he told me that Smith was a damn lie. This lawyer was the biggest man in Saint Louis so i figured that he knows what he was talking about. Well, I went back to Smith and told him that Mr. Easter said he was a damn lie. Smith didn't say a word but told that he was selling out his business and going out of town. I aint told my people nothing...I slept at a boy friend of mine house..and I aint hit a lick at a snake. You see me? Man, I was a mess....these legs and these hands done took me plenty places. Smith sold out...all of his good business. I felt sorry but Mr. Easter wouldn't let me change my mind.
"It was on a Monday evening, about two thirty in the day. Smith came to me at my friend's house and dropped three thousand dollars in my lap. He says, ‘git your damn divorce..but if i ever seen you anywhere outside of Saint Louis you is going to be a dead black sonofabitch.' I took the money...but I didn't know what to do with it. The lawyer's secretary called me up and ask me had Smith closed his store. I told her yes. Then she wanted to know if I got any money. I told her not yet. The Mr. Easter called me up..he says, 'you little black winch you better bring me my money before I put your black ass in jail.' I gets mad and calls him up. I says, Who in the fuck do you think you are? You or nobody can talk to me like that. Now, put my black ass in jail and don't get a fucking cent. He aint said nothing. I hid the money under my bed. In a little while about ten police-mens was at my house. Somebody went and told my papa about it. He ran downtown and got the lawyer of the place he was working at. Thats why I aint going to never forget my people. Shucks, that lawyer came to me in the jail and asked me what had happened. I told him everything and in ten minutes I was out. I went to his office. He asked me for the money. I brought him three thousand dollars. This man knowed how to talk to people thats the only reason I brought him the money. Well, right in my presence he telephones Mr. Easter and says, 'Well Easter, you know what you got yourself in I guess. How much of this money do you want? I don't know what Mr. Easter says, but my papa lawyer says, 'Here is a thousand dollars for you...give, half of it to your mamma and papa.' I left out of that office like I was crazy, went running home. I gives the money to my mamma and papa and they took it, was I happy? Then the lawyer calls my pappa up and tells him that I'M a bad girl and that he ought to let me take a trip for a while. That was good news. Man. I took my five hundred bucks and went right smack to Memphis. Me and my girl friend opens a good time house on Beale Street...aint had it filled with nothing but the steam boat boys. They strictly spends their dough...and we aint had a one of them. I got me a little slick brown nigger from Chicago...looked something like you. You remember I kept looking at you? You remind me of him. You see me? I'm particular..aint going to have these niggers around here. I can strictly do better than that, daddy.
"An then what happened? Man, I was making so much money I got tired making it...went on up to Chicago and got in the racket. Ran a Buffet Flat for a white boy named Angelo..he had his money and he strictly gave it to me, what I didn't steal. I was sending my mamma and papa so much money they would send it back...said I must er been stealing money. Well, what I'm going to do with it..I bought my pimp, this little brown be boy from Chicago, a brand new Buick automobile. But there is one thing I’M sorry for today...I didn't buy one/of them flats. My girl friend has one and is living fine..her's is on Calumet Ave. Sure, I rather have a house them a radio now or car now, but not them. And that aint been long ago. Don't let nobody fool you about the depression...I aint heard nothing about it. The only thing now is that money is a little short but a man is going to always pay to have a good time..I don't care if it is his last nickle. I see that every day. I see men come in with their last five-dollars…don't know where they're going to get a piece of bread from and will pay that money for a show. Most men like to see cock sucking shows, thats five dollars. Not me, I aint touched nobody nowhere with these lips! They can touch me...but I aint going to touch them. I like Bull Dagging but no funny business.
"But let me tell you, the reason I left Chicago was because Do you know I was hitting a spree, spending my flips and who do I come across but Smith..looking good in a high power car, pimping himself away. Man, when that black bastard saw me he jumped out of his car and came to running to me...with his fist out and something in his pocket. He says, 'Oh yes, you black bitch. You aint in Saint Louis now. You is in Chicago where a black man has a chance. I'll kill you When he says that I was gone. So, I figues it was better for me to git out of/town. That was four years ago.
"I had my same pig meat with me when I comes down here...I didn't know a soul. Me and my piggie laid up in the Page Hotel and spent our flips. We had seven hundred and forty-three dollars. But my pig liked his dope and nearly spent all of my money. I drank whiskey. Thats what I tell you...I haves my fun. This world don't owe me one penny I'm going to take a trip with one of the girl in January, we is going to Los Sngeles. She's got one of them Holloy Wood boys. You see? You never know. He thinks he's got something and aint got shit. Cose, me I'm going to lay my jive and git me a little jive job. She wants me to be her maid..but I aint thinking about that unless she pays me twenty dollars a week and give me free wheeling, cause I can strictly make it. Give me a drink...I'll pay for it.
"What them women do at my place..man, they do everything. Them is the most superstitious women in the world. Aint you heard that whores is the most superstitious women in the world. They puts pennies in their pist water to bring mens. They aint going to wash themselves with nothing but Life Buoy soap.....says the other kind make them have bad luck. They don't never keep their wash water too long, says it is bad luck. What makes me laugh is that them whores over there stoop out of the window every morning, says it loosens up their pussy…aint never heard about that before. I let the mens prick loosen up mine. Do they out anything in their pussy? Nothing but a sponge sometimes...many poor mens thinks he's gitting pussy and aint gitting nothing but sponge all the time. They got to do that. The landloard don't want no shit that you is sick and I got to stricly be paid.
"How I got that job? Man, I was lucky. Here I was dressed on Canal Street one day, just window shopping. My flips was gitting low. I'm beat for sleep cause I done been walking up and down North Rampart and Canal Street trying to pick up on something..met a gang of school boys who wanted some for fifty cents. Shucks, man, I wouldn't show a bastard my legs for fifty cents. If you aint got two and a half git going, makes me no difference! Anyhow, I'm beat..and up comes Johnny Palmisano, says Moran...l don't know his furst name...was protecting him, and that Sue and Mabel, two/ofay gals out of Chicago was with him. Well, I knows them people. We used to hustled together in Chi. So, I jumps in Johnny’ car and runs on down to see them. They had some funny black gal as maid. Sue and Mabel kisses me and pops, 'what you doing?' I says nothing. So, they hires me. Jive maid...go in the room and come out with anything the mens got in their pockets, anything. One day I took a pistol out of a detective's pocket. You should er seen me putting it back. Man, I can beat anybody in the world walking easy. Thats why they hired me, I know. But, I really cooks for them. Say man, them girls works hard. They go on dates and work the hotels. The Roosevelt? Sure the Roosevelt. What in the fuck is the Roosevelt? Man, them girls done worked the Blackstone and finer hotels than these dumps you got here. What does Johnny Do? He handles all of the money..even the money I takes. I gits some of it though. But, we done cut that out. The politicians asked us to stop stealing. Fucking is on the level now, but it sho did mess me up. I don't average but eighteen dollars a week…unless I git a live wire. No, I don't, turn no tricks. Johnny don't want it..says, 'Mary aint no use you fucking, too...these bastards might git to liking you and wont have nobody else.’ Johnny is my boy, can git anything he's got. I wouldn't swap jobs with nobody in the world...I know every angle of my job and I'm a good cook, too. Them girls eat anything I fix for them. Say man, don't you sporting class of people is the best people in the world. That goes for people from all over the world.. if it was left for the sporting class of people they wouldn't be no war. Them sonsofbitches just wants to fuck and have a good time, thats all You never see them mixing up in nothing thats not right.
"Man, don't ask me what I think about Negroes doing this and that. Say, it makes no difference to me. The best thing a nigger can do is have a fucking good time and get money anyway he can, and hold on to it like white folks. I got two hundred dollars in the bank. Who I get five hundred I'm going to send it all to my mamma and papa. They know what to do with it, I don't. I know that as long as I want to work I got a job. Say man, I keep telling you that sporting class of people is your best people. See when Joe Louis fights, man Johnny wins from one hundred to a thousand dollars...he done won over five thousand dollars on Joe. Johnny says, 'fuck what he is..he's good, give him a chance.' And that doesn't only go for Johnny, that goes for people from Mississippi and everywhere. They are girls over at my place from Mississippi who beat the shit out of a bastard because he argues that the referee stold the title from Lou Ambers and gives it to Henry Arnstrong. Say man, I eat and sleep with them people. I see them everyday…sporting class of people are the best people in the world I wouldn't pist on a bunch of business people. The hell with them. No, my boy. Give the sporting life. It is the best.
"Get sick..catck disease. Ha! Any woman who catches disease is a low down dirty whore and she ought to catch it. You got to be clean with yourself and don't get excited over money, examine every bastard, makes no difference if he's Roosevelt, examine him and you'll never be sick. Look-a here, this fucker trying to make out he don't know what I mean. Squeeze his dick hard...if something comes out of it he aint right, especially if something whitish comes out. Real whores don't get sick…I know some thats been hustling fifty years. I aint never been sick...I can look a bastard look right smack up in my pussy. If he sees anything I'll eat his prick!
"Religion? Man, religion is the dollar, thats mine. To tell you the truth I don't have time to think about religion. Do you? I aint been to church since I was ten years old. Yes, my people are christians…I aint telling them how to live their life. And they aint telling me how to live mine. I take care of them and so I profits, so do they. Thats religion. What you think? You don't think? Well.
"Tell you about some of the things that happen at my place? Buy some more whiskey. Let you see what? Oh, how much money you got. Ha-ha! Well, you poor bastard, aint got but fifty cents left..here taking all of my time. Man, you aint from shit! I Spend the fifty cents. Be broke…you'll be merry. Who in the fuck wants to have plenty money and don't be merry. Aint it better to be merry and not have any money? Thats what I says. Oh man, all kind of parties go on at my place. The shit eater wants a clean towel to wipe his mouth, says a dirty towel might give him some kind of disease. A cock sucker washes his hands and not his face, he don't want his hands to smell bad, says it is bad luck for his hands to smell bad. Whores do not sleep on the left side of their mens, says women belongs on the right side. No, I don't know any funny stories. What I tells you actually happened. I don't lie.
"What is my work..you says? No? Well, I'll you. I got to cook and clean up the rooms. You know every man wants a nice clean bed linen, soft pillows? Well, I give them that. Help the drunks to dress. No, the girls can't do it. They aint got time to be fooling with a man all night...when he's fucked he's through with. I take care of them then. Them girls got to go on dates and fill their dates at home. How much they make? Man, I don't know everything! They makes plenty. The graft. Johnny takes care of that. Wh he pays I don't know...yes, He be's around all the hotels. He knows all the big shots and big shits too. Boy, you talk me to deat...I'm going. Damn! Where I say? Buddy, thats something I don't tell nobody..if you want to have fun have it now cause you might not see me for a, long time. Not me.
"Well, so long folks (she was speaking to the bums and their women). Guess I'll be seeing y'all soon. Shucks, this black bastard done made me stay over my time." Everybody was laughing now; all eyes were taken off Mary and put on us. Mary left, her hips shaking behind her. "Dat Mary is some gal,” spoke one of the weak-minded women in a very friendly manner. We had to answer, "she is some gal!”
Elizabeth Henry
7419 Garfield St.
January 11, 1939
Life History
QUEEN OF FISH FRIES
Elizabeth Henry used to be the belle of her neighborhood. She was, the sparkplug of frivolity, which had no beginning or end. Her friends called her "Queen of the fish fries;" that was because she knew more about frying fish than a monkey knows about "poking his tail at people he dislikes. She could make a cat fish melt in your mouth, and "have the grease of its juice run down yo' belly." What about potato salad? Why Elizabeth had a special seasoning for potato salad. "Had a special seasoning fo’ my tato salad…used onions, parsely, garlic and celery, lil mayonaise made out of vinegar, eggs and salt," she says. Elizabeth will confidentially tell a friend, "I done fried plenty fish to get niggers out of jail." Folks in the neighborhood will verify this; they used to excitedly run to Elizabeth in unsurpressed plea, begging, "Lizzie fry plenty fish. Jim Bailey is in jail and we need two six bits mo’ to git him out." Did Elizabeth fry it Did Grant take Richmond?
Unfortunately, Elizabeth doesn't fry fish anymore. In fact, she isn't doing much of anything save, cooking for Mrs. Fryles who is giving Elizabeth work to keep her from starving. You see, Elizabeth is sixty-six years old and is suffering with high blood pressure. "These white folks is just helping me while I'm hyar. My days is numbered, I reckon. But I'm goin’ to keep goin’ till the Lawd takes my hand,” she softly said, her starry eyes looking at us in awe.
Elizabeth is a dark person; she is as affable as she is dark, which means she is very affable. Her face is wrinkled but open. She blinks her right eye, not in pain but in habit. When the weather is cold water runs out of this eye like a stream. Elizabeth wears a brwon stocking piece on her knappy head as a "skull cap; she also wears a brown bracelet on her left hand. Her clothes, always of conservative colors, and very few, are as wrinkled as her face and have seen better days.
Elizabeth was contacted at the present address where she lives in the second room of a comfortable three rom house with her ex-common-in-law husband, Manuel Hopper, and his common-in-law wife, black Alice Moore whom he calls "dark angel." Elizabeth lived with Manuel five years, when she was in good shape, and "B'fore my joints got crippled." She is in a very strange situation but doesn't seem to mind it. "What can I do? Manuel don't want no messin' around wid no limb hurtin' woman. He wants action. I'm old now now, and I sho can't give him none. Its been two yars since I left Manuel be wid Alice," Elizabeth bashfully says. She sleeps in an antique bed but in a very clean room which consist of two dresser drawers, an armour and two straight-back chairs. Elizabeth is very tidy. She likes to/wear aprons.
Now, just a word about Manuel Hopper who is from Saint John Parish, and his "dark angel," Alice Moore. First, Manuel is a tall, rangy fellow with strong, broad shoulders. He is black but proud, even walks like it, and in most cases very indifferent about things. Manuel started to become a preacher about fifteen years ago, when he was thirty-five years old, but he fell weak to a "yallar" woman and gave up the idea. No preacher can do whats right and keep his mind on a "yallar" woman, especially if he is a black preacher. But, Manuel didn't think about religion seriously. For, as Elizabeth says, religion gives satisfaction of mind but a woman gives satisfaction of ear, eye, mouth, hand, and feet. After some deliberation with himself Manuel figured that his mind wasn't worrying him, but his eyes saw that "Yallar" woman, his ears heard her tender voice, his mouth offered her money, and his feet took him to her house. Elizabeth explains/it this way, with some degree of firmness: " I reckon Manuel used his hands furst, which might er been alright if he had er used nothin' else. Ha! Boy, there aint a yallar woman livin' who can hold Manuel. No indeed! They is too tender. He needs a black woman. That woman changed her mind, thats about it." Manuel hasn't had a "Yallar" woman since that epsidore, according to Elizabeth who insists; "Maybe I can' tvtake him now but I been watchin' that nigger fo’ fifteen yars. His money is long but it sho aint long enough fo’ no yallar woman. Cause when a yallar woman takes on Manuel she knows she got work to do!"
"But old Manuel tickles me. He sho is some proud man. That nigger too. Shucks, Manuel is goin’ get in a wash pan of water fore he leaves the house. He washes himself everyday...can't stand no funk. He makes you bathe yo’ self wid plenty of soap. You really got to wash yo' self if you goin’ be around him. Man, Manuel used to make me wash myself so much I used to say Manuel is you crazy. That nigger would just sit down and roll, laughing. He used to say, 'cause you black don't make yo' self dirty black. Baby, wash yo' self.’ Don't you know I washed myself, I'm tellin’ you. I used to live that man, love him now, but I can't do no good.
"Old Manuel likes to hang around the corners in his shirt sleeves. He aint got but two coats. He likes to brag about what he used to do and talk about base-ball. Thats all he knows. Talks about them Pelicans or whatever you call 'em. There aint nobody in the world who beat Manuel braggin' He sho can talk talk...and aint got a dime in the world, drinks too much whiskey to have sumpin'. Right now, if Saint Peter'd say Manuel give me a dime and I'll get you into hebbin, he couldn't give Saint Peter a dime. He'd be a lost man. What he used to do? Shucks, Manuel worked but he was a pimp too. Wouldn't put his money down less you equalize it. What I means? I mean that when he put down a dollar you had to put down a dollar and a half, he calls that equalize it mamma. He used to around knocking out womens and take their money, used to beat dumb niggers out of their money playing cards. He can play Coon Can now. He met up wid me and got the livin' hell knocked but of him, but he won't tell that though. No indeed! Manuel likes to play checkers too. Thats what he's doin' now, I’ll bet.
"Well, he's a born riverfront man. He used to be a longshoreman but he works on the guvernment fleet now, makin’ eighteen dollars a week, but Alice only sees nine of them eighteen. The Lawd only knows what Manuel do's wid the rest of his money, I don't. He drinks plenty. I b'leives he drinks up most of his money. His whiskey bill was thirty-five dollars two months ago. Dago Charlie says Manuel bought five rounds of gin fo' the house and told him to add. He added alright, and Manuel paid him. Manuel's got a habit gettin' drunk and then tellin' them white folks to add. He means charge it. He nearly dies when its time to pay the bill, and he wants fo fight everybody, but he pays his bills. He swears he aint never goin' to get drunk no more. I don't pay no attention to Manuel. I know him. Cose, Alice don't say nothin’ She better/not say nothin' Manuell 'll knock her damn head off. Her fights her all the time, she's always in the hospital. Them doctors say to her, 'Girl, we is goin' to move over at yo' house, you need us.' The police catches Manuel but Alice drops the charges. Its gettin' so that Manuel don't even pick Manuel up no mo'. They told him it was alright to beat up his woman but don't he never steal nothin' from no white folks. Manuel said he wasn't goin’ crazy. Manuel aint goin' to whup me..better not. I'll fo'get I got sick limbs and bust the hell out him. He tells me all the time he can't figure me put. I stopped that nigger from figurin’ me out a long time ago."
As for Alice Moore, she is a puny black woman weighing almost ninety-seven pounds and about thirty years old. She seems to have come along a hard, weary road. Her eyes are sunk deeply in the back of her head, having her look like she has tuberculosis. She isn't very active but drinks like a fish. Alice has many scars on her face where she has been cut in scraps with women. "Oh, she'll fight about her mens alright," states Elizabeth in marked deceit. Elizabeth calls Alice the "Spirit Woman" because she creeps along, and soesn't talk much. She listens to Manuel as if he were a Hitler. Of course, she has been forced to do this by the timely wallop Manuel packs for her. Alice is flashy in her few clothes of loud colors. She attends church sometimes, but doesn't pray very hard. "All her prayin' is done to keep Manuel from breakin' her black ass," Elizabeth says with a grin.
"Alice don't spend much time in the Streets. She comes in early, cause Manuel ’ll sho fix her up. She can't mistreat me neither," Elizabeth slyly says, explaining, "Manuel calls her his dark angel. I don't know, why, guess its just a word. No, Alice don't work. Manuel don't want her too. He says she is the only woman he ever did have who got biggety when she had money, and Manuel don't like no woman to get biggety wid him. Thats why Alice aint got no clothes, aint got no insurance, thats why she goes around the street in Manuel's clothes, his shoes and things. The condition of her drawers is a wreck. All Manuel tells her is to keep her ass clean, thats enough. I tell her all the time why don't she leave Manuel. But she figures I want him. Old fool. I can't use Manuel. He aint goin’ to kill me in my old age…no indeed."
"One thing though," Elizabeth says, "Manuel and Alice sho pay their rent. I give ‘em whatever I can. That aint much. They better pay their rent. Miss Joh will throw ‘em out. I'm glad Manuel pays his rent, cause I don't know what I'll do. Them white folks give me lil food and a few cents but they sho aint goin' to pay my rent. And I can't get on that Welfare fo' nothin'. I'm goin’ to continue prayin' to Gawd lak I been doin'. Someday things will be dif’ferent. Someday the hebbins is goin' to opens its doors and tickle my hart and give me the things I been longin' fo'. I pray."
Elizabeth Henry's Life History is as spotted as those varigated skies above us. She was born in New Orleans, reared in New Orleans and "raised par'ticular hell" in New Orleans. "I'm strictly a N’Awleens woman," Elizabeth demurely says. "Me? I was born right hyar on Hillary Street. I was born sisty-six yars ago. Member that two story buildin' around there? That was the buildin'. It used to b'long to my grandpa and grandma. My grandma name was Sadie Henry, my grandpa John Henry. He was a bricklayer. Man, he laid some bricks. Used to make good money. What? My grandpa didn't have to work. My grandpa made enough to sit her down. My grandma and my grandpa died when I was a lil girl. My grandpa took wid pneumonia and my grandma died wid de disease of the hart, or sumpin'.
"My ma and pa raised me. Their names was Abraham Henry and Sarah Henry. No, none of 'em was named after my grandma and grandpa. My pa was a tall man. He was some stylish. Used to smoke one of them long cigars. Got 'em from the white folks. He used to be a butler. Had gold shinnin' teeth. People used to like to see him laugh. I don't know how my pa and ma met each other. I used to hyar 'em talk about it sometimes though. Pa said he was waitin’ fo’ a friend of his and the Street Car...them cars was pulled by mules then...and they used to do lak they do now. The ladies get on furst and then the mens. Well, my ma got on the Car furst and my pa got on b'hind her. She looked at him and he looked at her. then they spoke. When they looked around both of 'em was in love wid each other, I reckon. Anyway, they got married. It wasn't no shot gun weddin' neither. My pa was a gentleman and my ma was a lady. My maused to lak to be dressed up and go about seein' her friends She was lak the white folks, went visitin'. My pa used to tell her all the time, 'You do a heap of goin' out. Hope you aint doin' no devilment.' She wasn't doin’ no devilment atal, wasn’t that kind of a woman. My ma loved my pa. She used to tell me all the time, 'I done prayed fo’ that man. 'He's what I want.
“My pa was something of a dude; he lak to dress up too. Wore them pinch-back coats and them high pants. He laks them checko'board color pants. When he stepped out everybody looked at him. Pa used to lak that. Ma used to tell him he wanted to be a dude but ma used to tell him he better be a dude around the mens, cause if he was a dude around the womens she'd break his ass. Old pa used to just laugh. I don't know if he was a dude around the womens or not. Pa did a heap of goin' to church. Pa was plenty fussy with his clothes. You know what they say. When a man is fussy with his clothes he is fussy with the womens. What I mean by fussy? I means that he was plenty tuff with the womens. Tuff means that he was solid with the womens. What i solid? Man, solid means he was what the womens wanted, thats what.
“No, my ma aint teached my nothin' about fish fries. I picked that up all by myself. Let me tell you about fish fries. Fryin' fish aint as easy as people thinks. Thats why everybody can't fry fish. The main thing is you got to know how to make yo’ season slap yo’ mouth. That means you got to know how to get the taste out of yo’ season. Well, I tell you what you do. Furst, you get you some cookin’ meal..cose, I tell you right now. I use a furnace to fry my fish. Don't let anybody tell you that a stove can fry fish as good as a furnace. Now, I get me a piece of meat and throw it in the fryin’ pan I let that grease get hot till its almost smokin’. I put my corn meal right next to my grease and take a fork and pass my fish through the corn meal, and then I let my fish fry in the fryin’ pan till it gets lak a golden brown. Then I takes it out and its ready to be ate.
"Man, I'm tellin' you I could fry up some fish. I aint tellin' you no word of lie when I tell you I was the Queen of the fish fries. I done fried plenty fish to get po' niggers out of jail. Them jail birds niggers used to hang around me plenty and buy my fish, cause they know good and well that I had to get 'em out of jail. Aint you never hyared about Lizzie the fish fry queen? Boy, I could fry that fish and make it look yo color.
"My ma and pa got along fine till I was ten yars old. Then they separated. Pa 'cused ma of goin’ wid the preacher, and ma 'cused pa of goin wid the preacher's wife. There it was! After that my ma started takin' in washin' and ironin'. My pa died when I was in the fourth grade, my ma died ten yars ago.
"Sho, I think people ought to get all the education they can get. But I couldn't get no mo’ then I got cause after my ma and pa broke up my ma wasn't makin enough money to send me further. She had a bundle and didn't make no.mor then one fifty a day. The most they made washin’ and ironin' was five dollars a week. I left school to do days washin’ and help around the white folks house. I was gettin' to be a big girl and I was runnin’ around some. Thats when I met Eddie Lawrence and Charlie Scrivvens. I had two chillun fo' Charlie Scrivvens. I had two. One was named Charlie. He died at five yars old. The other was a girl; she died at child birth. Then I gave up. I says I don't want no mo' chillun. That was enough fo' me. What about Lawrence? Henaint did nothin'. He wasn't no baby maker. How I know: He aint done nothin'. Did he? How can I tell? Didn't i birth them babies?.
"Sho, I members how I met Eddie. I was cookin' fish in Fisher's Row on Cherokee Street. Everything was goin' fine. But up comes an argument. Eddie was in the argument. He was drunk but kept argunin!. He made me mad, so I told him, 'Listen, old nigger if you don't stop that arguin' I'm goin' to kick yo' damn pants whar you sit down.' I was plenty bad in them days. Didn't take nothin' off nobody. Well, Eddie says to me, 'Yeah, if you do I'll knock yo' damn head off.' Fore I looked around I done hit Eddie over the head wid a pitcher of water. His head started bleedin' and he started hollorin. That nigger was hollorin' lak a chicken with his head cut off. He come sayin', 'You black bitch. I'M goin' to get you yet, if its the last thing I do.' He got me alright…got me in the bed the next day. Shucks, that nigger turned a two dollar trick wid me and stayed with me twelve days after that. Did I like him. I aint seen nobody yet who could outfuck Eddie. Yeah, he's dead. Did I kill him? No, he died a natchal death. He had consumption! What I did after Eddie died? I went on sellin' my fish lak I did fore I ever met him. Oh, Charlie Scrivvens? Well, he was comin' around the same time Eddie was comin' around. Eddie was a workin' man. He worked on the riverfront. Charlie wasn't a workin' man. He just hung around me. Sometimes I got lonesome in the day time and Charlie was always around. Was Charlie in school? Man, the only school Charlie had was knockin' me up. That man could sho make babies. Whew! I used to tell him all the time, man, does you think I'm a baby/hatcher? He'd just laugh, but not me, huh!
"Eddie was nice to me. He put me in the Tulane Society. That was twenty seven yars ago. I been in there ever since. Better stay in there now. Whose goin' to bury me when I die? These people don't want nothin' to do with you when you die. They is lookin' fo' somebody else to bury you. When I close my eyes I want my soul to rest in peace. I don't want to be worryin' about who's goin’ to bury me. I members it well. Eddie says to me one day,.’ Lizzie..he called me Lizzie and Pinchey..you got to get me and you in some kind of a society cause we aint goin’ to live fo'ever.' Yes, Lawd, po' Eddie He's gone. But he was a good man. He sho did b'leiv in society. Never did start to disturbment afta I hit him over the head wid that pitcher. Thats what they says. If you want to get a man yo' way jest hit him over the head wid a pitcher, or sumpin!
"I'm a christian woman now..b’long to Zion Traveler's Church on Adam Street. Ekdey Haywood is the pastor. Sho, I remembers when I got religion and started thinkin’ about the Lawd. I was a lady. What about fish fries? I sold my fish. That aint had nothin' to do wid my religion. You can sell fish and be a lady. I had my fun...can't you have fun and be a lady? I did. Anyway, I was sittin' at my ant Emma's house..facts is..I was heqtin’ in her kitchen. Well, I had been prayin' fo' the longest. Askin' fo’ religion. On this day....it was on a Thursday evenin'…all of a sudden my stomach got fu;; and I was hungry. I felt a chill come over my hart. It went whizz! I looked b'hind me and there was the Lawd standin' there. He says, 'thats all right sister .You done just got religion. Go to yo' church and tell them that I sent you.' I was some scared. I went a-runnin’. I told my ant Emma...she told everybody. Everybody was so happy that Pinchey had got religion. I went to the head Stewardess' house, Miss Brown, she told me, 'darling, I'm sho is glad you got religion durin' our drive fo' sinners...now you can fry us some fish.' Then I started fryin' fish fo' the church...aint fried none fo' sinners or to get niggers out of jail. Just fried it fo' the church. Elder was happy, said I was doin’ good by the church. Well, I told my testimonies and got the blessin' of the oldest members of the church.....got the blessin' from everybody. But I figured that I had done done enough fo' the church so I went back to fryin' my fish and makin' some money fo" myself. I found, out that I had done fell way b'hind, I told Eddie I was goin’ to pick it up. He says, 'O.K.' Sho, I made it up. But I took sick and I had to get Doctor Heydell. He treated me fo’ three months..that was er bout 1921. I got better. He told me to take easy. Couldn't get Eddie to understand that. I don't sell no fish fo' the church or nobody else…aint worth it.
"There is an old sayin’ that you reap what you sew...well, I was doin' all right after Eddie died. My fish was goin' good and my bed room money was goin' good. Whats that? My furnish room money...now do you know what I means? Well, I was doin' fine... had gave Eddie a nice three hundred dollar funeral and everything. Lo and behold up pops black Manuel. He had plenty money on him, came hyar from Donaldsonville. Sumpin’ told me not to fool wid that nigger. Well, he says to me just lak this: "Say, what you goin’ do fry fish all nite. I done bought some homebrew and I wants to go to bed with you.' I says you cheaky black bastard...how much you got? He says, 'You name Lizzie?' I says thats my name. You know I got weak fo’ that black nigger. Stayed wid him five yars. I commenced gettin’ old and he started kickin' me around...wouldn’t give me his money no mo’ I couldn't do nothin’ cause I was weak to Manuel. Just lak I hit Eddie over the head wid that pitcher Manuel used to hit me. Sho wid a pitcher! I got rid of the pitcher but what good did it do? Manuel would hit me over the head wid anything he could get his hands on, makes no difference what it was! Used to ask me couldn't I do better than I was doin’…I told him I was an old woman and couldn't do no better. He says he didn't want no old woman. Shucks, when I looked around Manuel was foolin' wid .Alice smack in my bed. What could I do? was I weak? Yeah, and I was old too. Thats worse? You said it son.
"All my people done gone, son. I'm rite hyar on Manuel's hands. He and black Alice is doin' the best they can fo’ me. Yeah, Manuel knows that I did my best fo' him, thats why he won't put me out. Lawd, I'm sho glad I was good to that man when I had my money. If it wasn't fo’ that I'd be right smack in the streets. Good Gawd a-mighty! I'm all by myself. I'm tryin' to do my utmost to get to hebbin’. Whats it lak? I dunno but I'm tryin' to get there!.
"I'm doin' some cookin’..but I wouldn't call it cookin' neither..fo' Mrs. Fryles. She lives on Hillary and Commercial Streets. She gives me two dollars a week and three meals a day to help me, thats all. I eats breakfast, lunch and dinner there. I eats whatever she gives me, but she gives me the best of everything. She aint stingy wid me, no indeed!. If it wasn't for that White woman and Manuel I don't know what I'd do. She says she's goin' tp put me on the Welfare. Hope she does. Do I pay my dues out of what she gives me? Yes indeed! I pay fifty cents every month. Got to, I don't want no corporation to bury me. I wants a respectable funeral. I'm goin' to scrap till I can't no mo'. I done tried to find a better job. But the white folks don't want you when you is old and weak and not able. Wish I could get on the Welfare. When I dies the people aint goin' to say, 'Whars Pinchey at? Who is goin' to bury Pinchey. Sint that a shame’ I'm goin’ to keep myself in a society, son.
"Who me? Whats the matter wid him? Aint Roosevelt/well? He aint sick is he? Son, I don't know nothin’ bout President Roosevelt or politics. Thats a mess!. I aint never read nothin' bad about Roosevelt. No, I don't bother about no radios. I aint no belle now. Them days is done gone fo' ever. All I'm waitin’ fo' is the Lawd to call my name, then I'm gone. Papers? I stopped readin' the papers five yars ago. My sight got bad. Do I shout in church? No indeed! The soirits hits me and knocks me out. Can't shout!. Plans? Aint got none. I guess when them white folks make up their minds to give me sumpin’ I’ll be dead and gone.
"Sho, I’d fry fish if I could make some money. But I sho wouldn't mess wid nobody lak Manuel, A man lak that would kill me just as dead as dead itself.
"Well, let me go now. I got to go back to work. Come around again soon. I hope I'll be hyar when you come back. If the Lawd says the same I'll be right hyar."
Elizabeth Henry
7419 Garfield St.
January 11, 1939
Life History
ONCE WAS BUT AINT NO MORE
Elizabeth Henry used to be the belle of her neighborhood. She was the sparkplug of frivolity, which had no beginning or end. Her friends called her "Queen of the fish fries;" that was because she knew more about frying fish than a monkey knows about "poking his tail at people he dislikes." She could make a cat fish melt in your mouth. What about potato salad? Why Elizabeth had a special seasoning for potato sald. "Had a special season fo' man tato salad....used onions, parsely, garlic, celery, mayonaise made out of vinegar, eggs and salt,” Elizabeth will confidentially tell a friend, "Ah done fried plenty fish to git niggers out of jail." Folks. in the neighborhood used to excitedly run to Elizabeth yelling, "Lizzie, fry plenty fish. Jim Bailey is in jail and we need two six bits mo' to git him out,” Did Elizabeth fry it? Did Grant take Richmond?.
Unfortunately, Elizabeth doesn't fry fish anymore. In fact, she ins't doing much of anything save cooking for Mrs. Fryles who is giving Elizabeth work to keep her from starving. You see, Elizabeth is sixty-six years old and is suffering with high blood pressure. "Mah days is numbered, Ah guess. But Ah'm goin’ to keep goin' till de Lawd takes mah hand," she softly said.
Elizabeth is a dark person; she is as affable as she is dark, which means she is very affable. Her face is wrinkled but open. She blinks her right eye, not in pain but in habit. When it is cold water runs out of this eye. Elizabeth wears a brown stocking piece on her knappy head as a "skull cap;" she also wears a brown bracelet on her left hand. Her clothes are as wrinkled as her face and have seen better days. She was contacted at the present address where she lives in the second room of a comfortable three room house with her ex-common-in-law husband, Mauel Hopper, and his common-in-law wife, black Alice Moore. This is a very strange situation but Elizabeth doesn't seem to mind it. "What can Ah do? Manuel don't want no messin' er round...he wants action. Ah'm an old umman," Elizabeth bashfully says.
The life of Elizabeth Henry is as spotted as those varigated skies above us. She was born in New Orleans, reared in New Orleans and "raised hell" in New Orleans. "Ah'm strictly a N'Awleens umman," Elizabeth demurely says. "Ah was born rite hyar on Hillary Street sixty-six yars ago. Member dat two story buildin' dat was er round dere? Dat was de buildin'. It used to b'long to mah grandpa and grandma. Mah grandpa was a bricklayer....mah grandma didn't work. What was dere names? Ma grandpa was named John Henry; mah grandma was named Sadie Henry. Both, mah grandma and grandpa died was Ah was a little girl. Mah grandpa took wid pneumonia and grandma died wid de. disease de hart, or sumpin'."
"Mah ma and pa raised me. Dere names was Abraham Henry and Sarah Henry. No, none of dem was named after mah grandma and grandpa. Ah don't know how mah ma and pa met...Ah used to hyar dem talk er bout dat soemtimes, dough. Pa said he was waiting for one of dem horse and buggy street cars and up comes mah ma. Dey used to do lak dey do nowadays, De ladies git on de Street Cars furst. Well, mah pa stepped, aside and let mah ma git on de car. She looked at him and he looked at her. Den dey spoke when dey got on de Street Car and when both of dem turns around dey was loving each other Ah reckon. Anyway, dey got married.... it wasn't no shot gun weddin' neither. Mah pa was a gentleman and mah ma was a lady. No, she aint teached me nothin' er bout fish fries. Ah picked dat up mahself. Mah ma and pa got along fine till Ah was seven yars old...den dey broke up. Ah don't know why...dey just broke up. After dat mah ma started takin’ in washing and ironing Ma pa died when Ah was in de fourth grade. Mah ma died ten yars ago.”
“Sho, Ah think people ought to git all de education dey can git. But Ah couldn't git no mo' den Ah got cause afta mah pa left mah ma /wasn't makin’ enough money to send me all through school. She had a bundle and didn't make no mo den one dollar and fifty cents per day De most dere make makin' washin’ is four or five dollars a week. Ah left school to do day's work and make me some money. Ah was gittin’ to be a big girl den and was runnin' er round some. Dats when Ah met Eddie Lawrence and Charlie Scrivvens. Ah had two chillun for Charlie Scrivvens...one was named Charlie. He died at five yars old. De other was a girl; she died at child birth. Den Ah gave up...don't want no more chillun. Dats enough fo' me. What er bout Lawrence? He aint did nothin'...he wasn't no baby maker. How Ah know? He aint done nothin’. How can Ah tell? Didn't Ah birth dem chillun?"
"Sho, Ah members Ah was cookin' fish in Fisher's Row on Cherokee Street. Dere was an argument in de place. Ah think some people was argument er bout seventy-five cents. Eddie was in de argument. He was drunk but kept arguin’. Ah told him, 'lissen old black nigger if you don't stop dat arguin' Ah'm kick you in damn pants.' Oh Ah was bad in dem days…used to boot niggers rite in der britches. Wouldn't take nothin' off nobody...dat went fo' everybody. Well, Eddie says to me, 'Yeah, if you do Ah'll knock your damn head off.’ For Ah looked around Ah done hit Eddie over de head wid a pitcher of water His head started bleedin' and he started hollowin’ Dat nigger was hollowin’ like a chicken wid his head cut off. He said, 'you black bitch. Ah'm goin' to git if its de last thing Ah do.' He got me alright...got me in de bed de next day. Shucks, dat nigger turned a two dollar trick wid me and stayed wid me twelve yars after dat. Did Ah like him? Ah aint seen nobody yet to outfuck Eddie. Yeah, he's dead. Did Ah kill him? No! He died a natchel death...he had consumption! What Ah did afta Eddie died? Ah went on sellin' mah fish lak Ah did fore he met me. Oh, Charlie Scrivvens? Well, he was comin’ er round at de same time Eddie was comin’ er round. Eddie was a workin' man..he worked on de riverfront...Charlie wasn't a workin’ man..he jest hung around me. Sometimes Ah got lonesome in de day time and Charlie was always around School? Man, We was out of school den. Der Only school Charlie had was knockin’ me up....dat man could sho make babies. Whew! Ah used to tell him, ‘Man, does you think Ah’m a baby hatcher?’ He would jest laugh…but not me!”.
"Eddie was nice to me...he put me in de Tulane Society. Dat was twenty-seven yars ago. Ah, been in. dere ever since. Better stay in dere now. Whose goin' to bury me when Ah die? Dese people dont want nothin' to do wid you when you die. Dey is lookin' fo' somebody else to bury you. When Ah close mah eyes Ah want mah soul to rest in peace.....Ah don't want to be worryin' who is goin’ to bury me. Ah members it well. Eddie says to me one day, 'Lizzie....he called me Lizzie and Pinchey...you got to git me and you in some society cause we aint goin’ to live forever.’ Yes, Lawd. Poor Eddie, he's gone. But he was a good man. Never did start no disturbment afta Ah hit over de head wid dat pitcher. Dats what dey says...if you want to git a man your way jest hit him over de head wid sumpin'”
"Ah'm a Christian now..b'longs to Zion Travelers Church on Adam Street. Elder Heywood is.de pastor. Sho, Ah members when Ah got religion. Ah was a lady. What er bout fish fries? Ah sold mah fish. Well, can’t you sell fish and be a lady? Sho, Ah had mah fun..can't you have fun and be a lady? Ah did! Anyway, Ah was sittin' at mah Ant Emma's house..facts, Ah was heatin' in her kitchen. Well, Ah been prayin' for de longest…prayin’. Askin’ fo' religion. On dis day…..It was on a Thursday evenin. All of a sudden mah stomach got full and Ah was hungry. Ah felt a chill come over mah hart. It went Whiz. Ah looked b'hind me and dere was de Lawd standin' dere. He says, 'date all rite sister, you is got religion. Go to yo’ church and tell dem dat Ah sent you.’ Ah was scared...Ah went a-runnin'. Ah told mah Ant Emma..she told everybody. Everybody was so happy dat Pinchey had got religion! Ah went to de head Stewardess House, Miss Brown. She told me, 'Darlin' Ah'm sho is glad dat you got religion durin' our drive fo' sinners....now you can fry us some fish.' Den Ah started fryin' fish fo' de church....aint fried none for sinners..or niggers out of jail. Jest fried it fo' de church. Elder was happy…said Ah was doin good by de church. Well, Ah told mah testimonies and got de blessin' of de oldest sisters in de church...got de blessin’ from everybody.
But Ah figures dat Ah done done enough fo' de church so Ah went back to fryin' mah fish and makin' mah own money. Found dat Ah had fell way b'hind so Ah told Eddie Ah was goin' to make it up. He says, 'O.K.' Sho, Ah made it up. But Ah took sick and Ah had to git Doctor Heydel. He treated me fo' three months...dat was in er bout 1921. Ah got better. He told me to take it easy. So, Ah figures dat Ah better not git b'hind no mo' Aint been b'hind since. Don't sell no fish for de church or nobody else…aint worth it!”.
“There is an old saying that "you reap what you sew"....well..."Ah was doin' all rite after Eddie died Mah fish was goin' good and mah bed room money was goin’ good. Whats dat? Mah furnish rooms money.....now do you know what Ah means? Well, Ah was doin' fine..had gave Eddie a nice three hundred dollar funeral and everything. Lo and b'hold up pops black Manuel. He had plenty money on him…he came hyar from Donaldonville. Sumpin' told me not to fool wid dat nigger. Well, he says to me jest lak dis: "Say, what you gin' do fry fish all nite. Ah done bought some homebrew and Ah wants to be be’d wid.' Ah says, 'You cheaky black bastard....how much you got.’ He says, 'You name Lizzie.' Ah names it....and Ah got weak to dat black nigger. Stayed wid him ten yars. Ah commence gittin’ old and he started kickin' me around...wouldn't give me his money no mo'. Ah couldn't do nothin cause Ah weak. Jest lak Ah hit Eddie on de head wid dat pitcher Manuel used to hit me. Sho wid de pitcher! Ah did git rid of it..but what good did it do? Manuel would hit me over.de head wid anythin’ he could git has hand on, makes no difference what it was! Used to ask me couldn't Ah do no better den Ah was doin’….Ah told him Ah was gittin to be an old umman. He says he didn't want no old umman...Shucks, when Ah looked er round Manuel was havin’ black Alice rite smack in mah bed. What could Ah do? Was Ah weak? Yeah, and Ah was old too? Dats worse? You said it. Son".
"All mah people done gone, Son. Ah'm rite hyar on Manuel's hands. He and black Alice is doin' de best dey can fo’ me. Yeah, Manuel knows dat Ah did mah best fo’ him, dats why he wont put me out. Lawd, AH'm glad Ah was good to dat man when Ah had mah money, Son. If it wasn't fo’ dat Ag be right smack in do Streets. Good Gawd a-mighty! Ah’m by mahself. Ah'm tryin' to do mah utmost to git to hebbin. Whats its lak? Ah dunno but Ah'm tryin’ to git dere!".
Ah’m doin' some cookin’...but Ah wouldn't call it cookin' neither.....for Mrs. Fryles..she lives on Hillary and Commercial Streets. She gives me two dollars a week and three meals a day to help me, dats all. Ah eats breakfast, lunch and dinner dere. Sho, Ah eats whatever she gives me, but she gives me de best of everything, sshe aint stingy wid me, no indeed! If it wasn't fo' dat white umman and Manuel Ah don't know what Ah would do!. She says she's goin’ to put me on de W?P.A. Hope she does! Do Ah pay mah dues out of dat….Ah payes mah dues every month, fifty cents. Got to pay. Ah tell" you Ah don't want no corporation to bury me…Ah wants a respectable funeral. Ah'm goin' to scrap and scrap till Ah can't no more. Ah done tried to find a better job..but de white folks don't want you when you is weak and not able…wish Ah could git on de Welfare. When Ah dies de people aint goin’ to say, 'Whars Pinchey at? Who's goin' to bury Pinchey. Aint dat a shame!’ Ah'm goin’ to keep mah society up, Son."
"Who me? Whats de matter wid him? Aint Roosevelt well? Oh, Son, Ah don't know nothin' er bout President Roosevelt or politics. Dats mess! I aint never read nothin' bad er bout Roosevelt. No, Ah don't bother er bout radios...Ah aint no mo' belle. Got to take what comes now. Ah stopped readin' de papers five years ago...mah sight got bad den. Do Ah shout in church? No indeed! De spirits hits me but not lak dat. Plans? Ah dunno, guess Ah'll be dead when dem white folks decide to give me sumpin. Ah aint nothin’ now, Son, But Ah was! If Ah could only recall dem days. Sho, Ah would fry fish..but Ah wouldn't mess er round wid nobody lak Manuel. Well, let me go now...got to go back to work. Come er round agin soon.”
